abandoned, in an extreme state of dilapidation. The structure
is blistered by the resolute sun, the roof is weather-warped.
Dry rot and mildew wage a relentless battle against the
foundation. Between the building and the tracks is a long,
somewhat narrow platform, its floorboards twisted by time,
termites and the elements. The match-board overhang of the
building, throwing some little shade to a portion of the
platform, sags and bellies. From the overhang is appended a
rectangular panel on which, in flaky paint, the town is
identified:
One of the broken wires holding the panel is longer than the
other, cocking the sign irregularly.
The railroad tracks reach endlessly into the horizon. Past
the town on each side stretches the ocean-like prairie, with
sand dunes rising and falling monotonously, shouldering each
other toward infinity. The morning sun lays over this
wasteland of the American Southwest, a gigantic yellow bruise
from which heat waves like bloodshot arteries spread
themselves over the poisoned sky.
A small shack stands next to the station, separated from it
by a narrow alleyway and leaning toward the larger building,
as if for support. The words POSTAL TELEGRAPH are arced across
its dusty vitrine. An old straight-backed chair, reinforced
with twisted wire, is tilted against the north-west corner
of the shack. In it is Mr. Hastings, the postal telegraph
agent, a man of middle years and exorbitant mediocrity. He
sits there spinelessly, fingering a wart on his receding
chin and, once in a while, for variety, rubbing a knuckle
under his watery nose.
The town is minute, dismal and forgotten, crouching in
isolation where the single line of railroad track intersects
a secondary dirt road. The twin strips of steel glisten in
the fierce sunlight, fencing the dreary plain from the false
fronts of the town. In b.g. is the bluff of a black stony
mountain. Against this ancient mass the houses of Black Rock's
single street*** (See map, P.2A) are scanty in number and
insignificant in architecture, a conglomerate paint-peeled
modern trussed together with rusty nails and battered tin
strips torn from signs.
The town and the terrain surrounding it have, if nothing
else, the quality of inertia and immutibility -- nothing
moves, not even an insect; nothing breathes, not even the
wind. Town and terrain seem to be trapped, caught and held
forever in the sullen, abrasive earth.
Sequence omitted from original script.
jarring in its power as it ramrods across the desert, its
diesel engines pounding. Its horn "WONKS" twice, blasting
the shatterable air.
Nothing is changed, nothing is altered. But look close and
you will see a small shallow current of wind sweeping lazily
across the dirt and dust of the single street. HOLD for a
beat, then MAIN TITLE appears. Between the ensuing credits
INTERCUT a series of sharp LONG SHOTS. The composition of
each shot has that hard, sun-beaten texture of American
primitive painting -- pressurized in its simplicity -- best
exemplified, perhaps, by the work of Grant Wood.
assayer and notary public, mortician to the citizens of Black
Rock who have departed to a better place, and veterinarian
to its lesser animals. An elderly, somewhat untidy gentleman,
he sits nonchalantly on a chair outside the Bar & Grill.
Idling with him are three or four other loafers, among them
Sam, the middle-aged proprietor of the restaurant. Doc glances
casually at his watch; no one else moves. The hot wind
continues listlessly down the empty street.
Sequence omitted from original script.
A tall, attractive girl of twenty in dungarees and cotton
shirt. She stands just outside the open barn-like door of
the garage, staring, from the compulsive force of habit, at
the endlessly receding tracks. The sultry wind, its gustiness
slightly increased, blows through her fine dark hair.
Sequence omitted from original script.
two enormous men. HECTOR is tall, and there is about him a
nasty, raw-boned tautness; COLEY is more the anthropoid type --
long thick arms and a round, iron casing of a belly. They
glance down the street, watching incuriously a dust devil
swirling in the wind.
Now the CAMERA has completed its probe of the town and its
denizens. MAIN TITLE and CREDITS are completed...
still spineless in his chair, the chair still tilted against
the shack. From o.s. and far away, we hear the horn of the
streamliner -- two long "WONKS", a short and a long (engine
whistle signal for approach to bridge crossing). Hastings
straightens up ever so slightly as he reacts to the oncoming
train.
moving at tremendous speed.
with train barrelling toward it. The horn BLASTS -- three
short WONKS (engine whistle signal for stopping at next
station).
getting jerkily to his feet, as though charged by a galvanic
current. The uncharacteristic speed of his movements throws
the tilted chair to the station platform. He raises an arm
to shield his watery eyes from the sun...
heading toward CAMERA, churning across the desert like a
juggernaut. It PANS past CAMERA in a blur of speed. CAMERA
SWINGS UP on a level with the great iron wheels as the brakes
are applied. The wheels shriek agonizingly against the rails,
kicking up cinders and a wild flurry of dust. She cuts speed,
brakes hissing, and starts to slow down.
SHOOTING from rear of town, toward the railroad tracks. The
townspeople step out, frowning, cautious, disturbed. The
secure ritual of the train passing through, never stopping,
has somehow, for some unknown reason, been violated.
as his mouth tightens. His air of placidity vanishes, leaving
his features disturbed.
Her fine young face stiffens almost imperceptibly. Her eyes
are coated with a vague emptiness. She seems confused as she
halfturns toward the hotel.
Coley Trimble and Hector David, standing on the porch of the
hotel. They seem tense, responding variously to what might
be fear. Coley's nostrils flare, his flat ugly mouth
compresses. He looks profoundly serious. Hector wipes a glob
of dusty sweat from the socket of an eye and blinks rapidly.
as he stands in surprise, nervously alert, watching the train
as it comes to a complete stop. His jaw droops with the
slackness of fear.
Sequence omitted from original script.
with the train stationary before it. A sleek steel door of a
pullman clangs open. A colored porter carrying a suitcase
walks down the wrought-iron steps. He is stately, gray-haired
and lean, with the almost finical tidiness travelers associate
with trainmen. The man behind him is big-shouldered, a granite-
like wedge of a man with calm, piercing eyes. There is about
him an air of monumental dependability and quiet humor, but
his eyes are those of a man who has lately lived in somber
familiarity with pain. His left arm hangs from his shoulder
with that lifeless rigidity of paralysis, while the hand is
hidden in his pocket.
The porter puts the suitcase on the platform. In the distance
the town and its people are seen staring silently,
motionlessly. The big man glances toward them. He smiles a
sad, distasteful greeting to the town, its wretched dust.
its mean, modest buildings. The porter disappears into the
train as the conductor enters scene. He turns slowly,
following Macreedy's gaze...
Macreedy nods his thanks. The conductor signals the engineer
(o.s.) and steps on the train. The diesel's claxon blasts
the torrid air ominously. The train slowly, smoothly, begins
to move, picking up speed. The cars slip past until, quite
suddenly, the Streamliner is gone. For a moment Macreedy
watches it. Then, quite unconsciously, he takes a package of
cigarettes from his left hand pocket, taps the last one free
of the pack, sticks it between his lips and, crumpling the
empty pack, drops it beside the tracks. He takes a cardboard
book of matches, flicks it open, bends a match in half with
agile fingers, and with a sure frictional motion scrapes the
head against the sandpaper guard. The match flares, the
cigarette is lit. Macreedy inhales, exhales deeply, and turns
to pick up his suitcase. Then he sees Hastings, who walks
slowly, almost painfully, to him. His Adam's apple grapples
protestingly with his collar. After a moment he controls it
sufficiently to talk...
Hastings looks at him blankly. The thousand-yard stare of a
hypnotic glazes his features.
Hastings points.
With his suitcase, he cuts across a weedy path, running into
Black Rock's single street. For a moment, Hastings stares
after him; then he breaks hurriedly, entering telegraph
agent's shack.
as Hastings, fumbling, picks up the phone...
SHOOTING down the street as Macreedy slowly walks toward the
hotel. Not a person has moved, each eye is glued on the
stranger.
The hollow rasp of Macreedy's tread on the wooden platform
of the "pavement" seems shatteringly loud in the enveloping
silence...
as she follows the man's movement.
Sequence omitted from original script.
as he walks along. He feels the eyes of everyone following
him, glaring at him. He halts, looks around. The townspeople
continue to eye him brazenly, yet with an almost animal
incuriosity. He grins and walks on past a cluster of five or
six RFD mail boxes and a road sign [1], its paint peeling,
its face punctured by three or four bullets from a drunk's
pistol long ago.
heading toward the hotel. In b.g. is a relatively small farm
equipment yard compressed between a general store (which
Macreedy has just passed) and the hotel just ahead. In the
yard are a few tractors, and among them huddles a tiny office.
It is empty; the front window is thick with dust. On it,
etched by an anonymous, childish finger, is a skull and
crossbones. Running diagonally across is the printed legend:
Macreedy notes the inscription with a sort of wry bemusement.
He walks on, reaching the facade of the weather-beaten hotel.
A gust of wind swirls down the street, momentarily engulfing
Macreedy and the entire area in a sudden eddying whirlpool.
As it subsides...
As he peers through the dust toward the dingy hotel. It has
a narrow stoop and outsize bay windows on each side. Macreedy
mounts the hotel steps. At the top of the steps Coley Trimble
and Hector David watch him silently. Hector is large and
leanly muscular, yet Coley looms over him like a battleship.
He is a gross behemoth of a man, with sharp flinty eyes the
size of glistening pinpoints and a slack, oversized jaw.
Both men wear modern Western work clothes, but there is one
incongruous accessory which Hector affects. Around his thick
wrist is a watch with a large flat face and an elaborately
tooled leather strap -- a cheap reproduction of one of those
expensive Swiss timepieces which, among many distinguished
accomplishments, tells the day of the week, the month of the
year, the phase of the moon, etc., etc.
No reaction from Hector.
He brushes past Coley and enters.
Coley nods and heads down the street. Hector enters the hotel.
Sequence omitted from original script.
It is a typical small town hotel, but crummier, with a tiny
lobby. Macreedy is waiting at the empty desk as Hector strolls
in, flopping his enormous bulk into a nicked and mothy chair.
He picks up a newspaper, but his eyes remain on Macreedy.
Macreedy waits patiently for the absent clerk. For a moment,
he studies the open registration ledger; his eyes rove from
the ink-splotched blotter up over the desk to one of those
World War II banners, the imitation silk now stained and
faded. It depicts a shrieking eagle rampant, clutching The
Flag in a claw. Under it, the legend:
Near it, a tacky placard proclaims:
Feeling the eyes of Hector on him, Macreedy turns. Hector
meets his gaze with bland, insolent interest. Now a young
man (his name is PETE) comes out of a small room behind the
registration desk and walks up to it. There is a softness
about his regular features, a certain indefinable sugariness
about his mouth. He seems tight-lipped, for lorn and uneasy
as he faces Macreedy across the counter.
Macreedy looks at the young man with impeccable tolerance.
Without shifting his gaze, he slowly lets fall his small
suitcase. It thuds softly on the frayed carpet.
Macreedy looks down at the open ledger on the desk before
him. The clerk reaches out to close it. Gently, yet firmly,
Macreedy stops him, reopening the big book. He studies it, a
finger straying unconsciously inside his collar. He [...] on
it to relieve the starchy stiffness.
Pete begins to fidget...
His voice fades desperately.
Again his voice trails off.
Macreedy leans over the counter to a rack of keys. He runs
his splayed fingers over the key rack as...
Pete opens his mouth but no sound comes out. [...] at Hector.
glowering at Pete.
as Macreedy signs the ledger.
He picks up the key.
Macreedy nods, reaches for the bag at his feet. Then he
hesitates, looks at Hector.
Macreedy says nothing. The wales along his face harden. He
picks up his bag and climbs the stairs. As he disappears,
Hector lumbers to the desk and grabs the ledger.
As Pete bites his lower lip thoughtfully,
Sequence omitted from original script.
in a new bathrobe, before a cracked, discolored mirror. He
draws a safety razor down his face, completing his shave;
then he wipes a hand over the mirror, which clouds with steam
almost as fast as he can clear it. o.s., the SOUND of bath
water gurgling down the tub drain. He runs a tentative finger
inside the collar of his robe, pulling loose a price tag. He
drops it carefully into a wastebasket. He turns on the faucet
at the sink to rinse his shaving brush. The rusty pipes cough
and rumble, roaring as a trickle of water arrives while the
drain sucks loudly at its departure. He dries the razor,
turns off the faucet and exits.
As he walks down the dark, narrow hall. He wears the bathrobe
and slippers; a large towel is draped over his head, like a
prize fighter. He stops outside a door, pushes the towel
from his head to his neck and puts his hand on the knob. He
is about to insert the key when he tenses. Slowly, silently,
he turns the knob and throws open the door.
Next to the door, in the corner of the small, sparsely
furnished room is Macreedy's suitcase, open, its contents
askew and scattered over the dusty floor. On the bed sprawls
Hector David, his gigantic body straining the springs. He
lies on his back, hands clasped easily under his head, thick
legs crossed, his Stetson tilted over his low forehead. He
is completely unconcerned by Macreedy's entrance. For a moment
Macreedy stares at him. Then...
Slowly, his eyes still on Macreedy, Hector takes off his
elaborate wrist watch and slides it gently into his pants
pocket.
Macreedy pauses and takes in the situation. He refuses to be
baited.
For a moment their eyes lock. Then Macreedy goes to his
suitcase and throws his clothes in it. As he goes out the
door...
Sequence omitted from original script.
They sit around, each with his own thoughts. They are
generally stolid; only Sam seems nervous. He looks up eagerly
as Doc Velie enters the lobby. As he joins Sam...
Sam walks light for a big man, Doc.
Sam follows Doc's gaze...
Macreedy walks down the stairs. Pete looks up from the desk.
He is about to dart behind the partition when...
He walks to the desk, smiling at Pete. In b.g., Doc, Sam and
the loafers watch.
Pete studies him, then bends under the counter, coming up
with a pack. Doc leaves Sam and is slowly walking toward the
stranger, eyeing him curiously.
Macreedy throws the money on the desk and opens the pack,
dexterously using the fingers of his left hand.
Macreedy looks at him, inhales deeply on his cigarette then,
as he slowly lets the smoke out, removes the cigarette and
looks at it.
Now Doc is at the desk not far from Macreedy. Macreedy starts
out, then turns to Pete.
Macreedy smiles and sighs tiredly. Then...
Macreedy pauses, looking at Doc, who blandly returns his
stare.
Doc nods. Macreedy smiles and walks toward the door; Pete,
Doc et al watching him. He goes out.
As Macreedy walks down hotel steps, a station wagon pulls up
just before him. Tied with a rope to the right front fender
is a magnificent eight-point buck. A stain of dry blood weaves
an uneven course down his glossy flank from an unmistakable
bullet hole in his shoulder. Two men get out of the car; one
of them is Coley Trimble. He sees Macreedy coming toward
him. He stands motionless in the center of the narrow
pavement, picking at his nose with the detachment of a child.
The other man is broad and excessively masculine as he swings
out from behind the wheel. He walks around the car, joining
Coley at the curb. Macreedy comes on. The man with Coley
looks at the stranger with colossal indifference, as
expressionless as the soil of Black Rock. His handsome face,
under a dusty hunting cap, is taut and hard and wind-shaven.
Next to Coley he stands motionless, except for the wisp of
smoke from a black Cuban cigarette between his thin lips. In
b.g., the loafers who had been ensconced in the hotel lobby
move out the door and stand on the porch. They watch Macreedy,
Coley and Reno Smith, the handsome, taut-faced man. Silence
soems to settle over everything. It is Macreedy who breaks
it...
Gently he walks around Coley and Reno Smith and continues
down the street. Coley's eyes follow him. Smith goes up the
steps of the hotel and enters the lobby. Coley quickly follows
him. The loafers on the porch go back inside.
The loafers resume their familiar places as Smith walks
briskly to the clerk's desk. Pete, in anticipation, opens
the hotel register, places it before Smith
Smith doesn't answer; he looks up thoughtfully. His eyes
harden almost imperceptibly as he sees Coley, across the
narrow room, looking out the window after Macreedy.
Coley sits in the nearest chair. Beyond Smith, still resting
easily against the high counter of Pete's desk, the gigantic
figure of Hector appears at the top of the stairs. He comes
down and joins Smith.
He hesitates as Doc Velie sidles amiably into earshot.
Smith looks thoughtfully out the window.
Macreedy, down the end of the block, saunters easily up to
Liz's garage.
The garage, without a door, opens on the street. Against the
front of the building is parked a battered bicycle. On one
of the barnlike walls a boy of nine is drawing laboriously
with a piece of chalk. He puts the last flourish to a skull
and crossbones identical with that seen earlier on the window
of the equipment yard office. Macreedy stops a few feet from
him, waiting until the boy prints "T.J.". As he steps back
to admire his handiwork...
T.J. nods. He approaches the wall, raising his chalk.
He pauses. As Macreedy opens his mouth to interrogate
further...
Again a pause. T.J. has just completed the final letter of
the word "HATES". And again as Macreedy opens his mouth...
Again the pause. T.J. steps back, having completed his work,
which, of course, broadcasts the fact that "T.J. HATES J.S.".
And again as Macreedy begins to speak...
T.J. turns, pulls the bike away from the building, completes
a fastidious "pony express" and peddles furiously out of
scene.
as Macreedy, after a moment's hesitation, starts down it.
From the far end, at the telegraph agent's shack, a figure
starts running toward Macreedy. It is Hastings. INTERCUT
between the two men. Hastings, in his concentration, doesn't
see the stranger until he is almost upon him. He slows down,
suddenly, awkwardly, to a self-conscious walk. Macreedy grins
at him, passes on, shaking his head speculatively. Hastings,
with a parting glance, gallops up the hotel steps.
Smith, Coley, Hector, Pete, Doc, Sam et al are still in
evidence. Smith is in a tight little group at the desk with
Coley, Hector and Pete. Doc has taken a position at the
window, looking out. Hastings bursts in and half-runs to
Smith...
as the excited telegraph agent speaks.
Smith ignores him, thinking. Hastings breathes heavily.
Finally...
Hastings nods, scribbling on a pad.
Hastings nods and hurriedly exits.
Smith looks at Coley, trying to decide if the question in
any way challenges his authority. He concludes not...
Pete nods, his brow furrowed uncomfortably in a frown.
At this point the brittle silence is cracked by...
Smith and those around him look off in the direction of Doc.
peering out. He turns in the direction of Smith and the
others.
Smith goes to the window, edging Doc to one side with a
shoulder. He looks out grimly.
Macreedy, down the street, cuts up the steps of the jail.
Smith staring out the window with a frown. Doc watching him
out of the corner of his eye, a bemused expression crossing
his puckish features.
Sequence omitted from original script.
ANGLE on Macreedy as he enters the jail. It is small and
dirty, with only a tired desk, two chairs and the usual police
posters on the wall. One side leads to the cell block and
Macreedy heads for it.
ANGLE from interior of cell block comprising two cells, both
of which are open. A man is asleep in the lower bunk of the
front cell. The keys are in the lock. Macreedy shakes his
head and starts to close the creaking cell door. Sheriff TIM
HORN, the man in the bunk, lifts his head, blinking his bleary
eyes. He is in terrible shape.
He manages to crawl off the bunk and out toward Macreedy.
He walks out of the cell, Macreedy following him into the
office.
Tim breaks out a bottle of booze, starts to take a snort,
then stops, offers it to Macreedy.
He takes a belt that would incapacitate half the county. He
finishes, smacks his lips, lays the bottle down, and falls
into a chair. He looks up at Macreedy.
Tim studies him, trying to focus.
Macreedy starts to say something, then stops. Reconsidering...
The Sheriff reaches for his bottle. In his haste he drops
it. Macreedy's hand moves quickly, catching the bottle before
it hits the floor.
For a moment heavy silence. Finally...
Macreedy grins harshly and exits. Tim watches him go, then
slowly reaches for the bottle. He pauses, looks at his shaking
hand. Then he withdraws it and just sits in the chair staring
blindly ahead, seeing nothing.
Frowning, deep in thought, Macreedy walks down the dusty
street. As he reaches the hotel...
Macreedy stops, looks toward Smith as he walks out to meet
him.
As Smith joins him, he walks on. Smith falls in step beside
him. GO WITH THEM.
At this point they are in front of...
Macreedy stops, as does Smith. He looks keenly at Smith as
he takes from his inner jacket pocket a half-dozen letters...
Smith opens his mouth to reply when the NOISE of a jeep o.s.
interrupts him. The jeep comes INTO SHOT. Liz Brooks, at the
wheel, cuts the engine and jumps out. Smith ambles silently
to a wall and leans against it. Liz reaches behind the
driver's seat and hoists, with both hands and some effort, a
five-gallon drum of axle grease from the floor of the jeep.
As she rests it on the rear fender...
The girl looks at Smith, who has made no attempt to help
her.
She lifts the drum to the ground.
Liz looks from Smith to Macreedy, puzzled.
Liz hesitates. Macreedy notes her confusion as her eyes seek
Smith's for instructions. Quickly he moves in...
Macreedy hands her a bill. She fumbles with it, not knowing
what else to do. Her eyes drift to Macreedy's stiff arm...
He steps toward the jeep as...
He steps into jeep and, with one hand expertly manipulating
the controls, drives off.
Smith turns his attention to the girl...
For a moment Smith doesn't answer. Instead, with a half frown,
he lifts the bill Macreedy had given her from Liz's hand.
He crumples it, pokes the wad in her hand and walks off down
the street as...
Sequence omitted from original script.
Tim sits in his chair, still staring sightlessly at the
whiskey bottle. Smith enters. He looks from Tim to the bottle
on the table, then back to Tim.
He stares harshly at the Sheriff. Tim tries unsuccessfully
to meet his gaze. Then, slowly, he sits down.
Smith slowly walks behind Tim's chair and silently,
patronizingly pats the Sheriff's slack shoulder...
Hastings is sitting at his desk. The telegraph ticker starts
to splutter. Hastings rushes to it. He listens, and starts
to scribble. Then he gulps nervously, a confused expression
on his face. As the telegraph key stops as suddenly as it
had begun, Hastings jumps up frantically and, holding the
sheet of paper, runs out of the shack.
as he runs toward hotel.
with Doc, Sam, Coley, Hector and Pete on the porch. Hastings
runs up the steps, pausing momentarily. His jaws move, but
CAMERA is too far away to pick up his obvious question. Coley
gestures toward the jail; then Hastings turns and runs down
the steps followed by Doc et al.
Hastings runs down the street toward the jail followed by
Doc et al.
as Hastings runs up the steps with a hobnailed clatter. Smith
comes out to investigate, followed by Tim. Doc, et al are
congregated at the foot of the steps. Hastings slaps the
sheet of paper in front of Smith. Utter quiet. Everyone stares
at Smith, waiting for a reaction -- everyone except Tim, who
stares straight ahead, seeing nothing, and Doc, whose eyes
are locked sympathetically on Tim. Smith finishes reading
the wire. His face is expressionless. After a moment...
Smith doesn't answer but...
He folds the message carefully, puts it in his pocket.
Abruptly Tim turns and disappears inside his office. Smith,
with some restraint, walks down the steps to the street.
as he takes Coley's arm, and Pete's. The trio moves away,
taking a position perhaps 15 feet from Doc. Hector, Sam and
Hastings move toward them.
Sequence omitted from original script.
In b.g. at a respectful distance are Hector, Sam and Hastings.
SHOOT parallel to tracks, which disappear far into the
horizon.
The following dialogue is delivered in an undertone...
Coley is terribly preoccupied, balances himself, like a child,
on a steel rail.
Brittle silence for a moment. Then...
Pete doesn't answer.
Pete is silent.
There is a long, electric silence. Pete is defeated.
He pauses for emphasis. Then, as he starts to talk again...
Tim stands facing the wall, shoulders hunched, suffering.
Doc comes in and watches him silently, Tim turns, facing
Doc, turns again to concentrate on a faded newspaper
photograph framed and hanging on the wall.
SHOOTING over his shoulder. Focal point: the "photograph".
It shows a widly grinning, moderately alert and healthy Tim
of perhaps five years ago. He is wearing, proudly, his badge
of office, and behind him, mildly interested in the
proceedings, is Reno Smith, his erstwhile sponsor. The heading
on the photo reads: DEPUTY SHERIFF NAMED FOR BLACK ROCK.
Tim takes the photo off the wall and, holding it, turns to
face Doc...
Doc squirms but doesn't answer.
Tim takes off his badge and throws it on the desk.
They look at each other. Slowly Tim picks up his badge and
pins it back on.
Sequence omitted from original script.
An old marker, jutting on an angle at the side of the road,
reads: ADOBE FLAT. Beneath it an arrow points ahead. Macreedy
steers the jeep up the narrow, rutted trail between a serious
of enormous boulders.
as he drives to the far end of the boulders, reaching a flat
piece of land completely surrounded by rocks. Beyond the
rocks is what remains of a burned-out ranch house, and an
abandoned well.
Sequence omitted from original script.
in the wreckage. The remains of an iron bed. The burned-out
shell of a pick-up truck. Part of a stove. A morass of
bottles, all sizes and shapes, some of them broken. Macreedy
halts momentarily beside the well. Reaching out he touches
the warped sun-beaten boards that cover the mouth. He removes
one, and, picking up a pebble, drops it through the opening.
There is a long beat and then, from far, far below we HEAR a
faint PLUNK (o.s.). He replaces the board and walks to a
broken wall. He touches the burned out frame of a picture.
The frame falls to the ground, leaving an un-scorched square
on the surface of the wall. He goes past a solitary standing
stone chimney. Suddenly he halts, arrested by something among
the rubble, the rottenness and the ashes.
Surrounded by the seared and blackened earth is a rectangular
patch of lovely wild flowers.
studying the brightly colored flowers. His face is lined in
thought. He stoops, gathers a few buds in his hand. He
examines them, his brow furrowed. As he slowly twirls a flower
between thumb and forefinger, CAMERA PANS from Macreedy in a
long slow arc, taking in miles and miles of barren wasteland.
CAMERA RISES, TILTING UPWARD to a cliff far away and shielded
from Macreedy's view by the intervening rocks and ridges.
and on it the outline of an automobile.
empty. It is parked on a narrow dirt road. On one side of
the road the cliff falls abruptly to the valley far below;
on the other, the steep, shaly outcropping continues to rise.
For a moment CAMERA HOLDS on the car. Then it PANS SLOWLY
upward about fifty feet, HOLDING this time on...
where a man is looking off toward Adobe Flat through a pair
of high-powered glasses. The man is Coley Trimble.
Grimly he walks toward the jeep, still holding the wild
flowers. Now he pockets them, jumps into the vehicle and
drives off.
continues to train his glasses on Macreedy far below in the
moving jeep.
driving steadily over rough, rocky terrain.
climbs down from the pinnacle of the cliff and enters a big,
powerful '36 Packard sedan.
shifts to low gear as the jeep presses into hilly country.
turns on the ignition.
as it winds along a road with the cliff rising on one side
and falling off steeply on the other. He rounds a curve,
passes an insignificant side road, drives on.
The car with Coley at the wheel pulls out, follows Macreedy.
INTERCUT between the two cars, with the distance between
them constantly diminishing.
Sequence omitted from original script.
a straightaway, cutting through rocky outcroppings on both
sides. Macreedy's jeep roars by, pursued by the gaining
Packard.
For the first time he is aware that he is being followed,
and that the man at the wheel of the big Packard is Coley.
picking up tremendous speed.
proceeding over a series of turns, inclines, declivities
(according to location terrain). Engines roar, brakes whinny,
tires scream, skidding on the turns.
as Coley overtakes Macreedy. He steers the big car within a
foot or two of the jeep. The terrain has steepened; on the
right there is nothing between the road and the valley floor
far below but a few inches of soft shoulder.
As Macreedy pulls wide on a razor turn, Coley tries to come
inside him. Macreedy, fighting for control of the veering
jeep, succeeds in cutting him off.
In the approach, Coley cuts sharp into the jeep. The jeep
seems to roll with the blow, then leaps ahead, maneuvering
the turn.
Coley is flustered, his face blood-shot with fury. He seems
to generate an atmosphere of vicious, cruel craziness; the
wild smile across his mouth is almost sensual, obscene. He
floorboards the Packard. Like some monstrous battering ram,
the heavy car smashes into the jeep's rear bumper, kicking
the smaller vehicle jerkily ahead. Coley floorboards the gas
pedal, again. Each time he slams into the jeep with sickening
force, with the brutal abrasion of metal pounding metal.
With one arm he works frantically to keep his under-sized
car on the twisty road. He sees ahead a precipitous cliff
falling off on an impossibly sharp curve. He makes a
decision...
Just ahead the gradient is comparatively gradual, however
steep by normal standards. He swings the jeep off the road,
onto the declivity. The car plunges downward, miraculously
upright. Macreedy jockeys it to a whirring, shuddering halt
in the soft sand at the bottom of a draw.
Macreedy turns slightly and looks up the mountain-side with
the road at its summit...
standing at the edge of the road, peering down at him. In
b.g., the Packard. Coley turns emphatically, gets into car,
drives off.
His face is caked with the sweat of his exertions and dust
kicked up by the grinding wheels. He exhales heavily and
runs a shaky hand across the side of his head. He becomes
aware suddenly of a NOISE, a trickling, an unmistakable tinkle
as of running water. He frowns, opens the jeep door...
as Macreedy unlatches the hood and throws it open. The NOISE
continues. Macreedy examines the engine and finds the
difficulty...
focal point: the nut joining the gas line with the carburetor
has worked loose in the jouncing the car has taken. With his
hand Macreedy screws it tight.
as Macreedy lowers the hood, re-enters jeep. He turns on
ignition. The engine fires. As he drives slowly out of the
ravine...
his long face even more horsey than usual, with half an apple
in his mouth. He stands in front of the grocery store, with
the baskets of fruit on the sidewalk. He looks up, stops
crunching.
at the window of the Bar & Grill, cleaning an ear with a
toothpick. He looks out. The toothpick is motionless.
fidgeting outside his shack. He looks up. His Adam's apple
turns completely over.
Sequence omitted from original script.
Macreedy slowly driving the jeep toward Liz's garage. He
looks neither to the right nor left.
Standing on the porch of the hotel, watching. Smith's face
compresses, and his eyes swivel to rest on Coley's with cold,
contemptuous anger. Coley licks his lips uneasily. Smith
turns and enters the hotel. Coley meekly follows.
He brakes the jeep before the garage. No one is there. He
parks the vehicle, gets out and heads down the street.
Macreedy is about to go up the steps when he sees Coley's
car at the curb. Both right fenders are creased. An ugly,
jagged break has split the front bumper almost in half, one
part angling crazily toward the sky, the other drooping in
the dust of the road. Smith and Coley come out of the hotel.
They stand on the porch, watching Macreedy as he in turn
watches the car. They exchange a glance. Smith nods, so...
He walks down the steps to the street, joining Macreedy.
Smith remains on the porch.
He walks up the steps, past Smith, and into the hotel. Coley
glances up at Smith, grinning with self-satisfaction, like a
small boy who has carried out perfectly the instructions of
his teacher.
The lobby empty except for Pete behind the desk. Macreedy
goes to him. Pete seems elaborately occupied arranging and
re-arranging a few file cards. Smith enters the lobby. He
stands in b.g. watching Macreedy and the desk clerk.
He turns, walks toward porch. Pete looks at Smith. Smith's
eyes follow Macreedy.
Sequence omitted from original script.
In the gloom of the lube pit, Liz's mechanic, a dirty old
man, is draining the oil out of the crankcase of the car on
the rack. The girl stands beside the pit, silently watching
the old man. Now she pauses, looks o.s. toward the open garage
doors...
entering the scene, stopping to look at Liz's jeep parked in
front of the wide doors. He turns his eyes vaguely in the
direction of Liz, but he doesn't see her in the shadows behind
the car on the rack, He advances a step, pausing...
Sequence omitted from original script.
She does not answer. Instead, she silently twists the
crankcase petcock, stopping the flow of oil. She watches
Macreedy closely.
Macreedy again shifts his eyes to the jeep, then, with
decision, he goes to a work bench, opening the drawers and
rummaging among the contents.
Macreedy turns as Liz comes toward him. She gestures toward
the open drawers.
Macreedy waits for her to go on. She doesn't. She stands
there, staring at him.
She turns, walks back toward the lube pit.
She doesn't answer. Macreedy goes to her.
She opens her mouth to answer, but she doesn't know what to
say.
He waits as she tries to answer, and again she can't. For a
moment he watches her struggle in anguished silence with
herself. Then he turns and goes out.
walks thoughtfully down street. He comes abreast of hotel.
where Smith is still sitting. For a moment he watches Macreedy
speculatively, then...
He stands facing Smith on the porch, then...
He takes the other chair.
Smith laughs quietly.
Macreedy laughs quietly.
He takes the wild flowers from his pocket, holding them in
front of Smith.
Macreedy gets up, half turns to Smith.
He starts down the steps.
He turns and walks down the street.
headed towards Doc's establishment. The building, which serves
Doc as home, office and laboratory, has centered on a pane
of glass:
And in the lower right hand corner:
A few of the peeled gold and black letters are completely
missing.
The building is separated from the structure next to it by
an alleyway. Filling the narrow passage is Hector David, his
long massive body wedged against the wall like an unkempt
monument. His little pig eyes meet Macreedy's. Hector spits
in the dust with bland insolence.
walks up the steps and enters.
Dark and shadowy. At the far end of a hallway an insipid
light bulb burns. Macreedy goes toward it, entering...
devoted to the care and preservation of the Dear Departed.
In the center of the room is a long rectangular slab stained
with the juices of those unfortunates who have had occasion
to rest thereon. The walls are lined with rickety bookcases
jammed, not with volumes, but with the jugs and jars, the
chemicals and unguents of Doc's multiple callings. In a corner
three or four neat pine boxes are stacked one on the other.
Doc sits at a cluttered desk feeding a large bowl of goldfish
and sipping a glass of milk. He looks up as Macreedy enters.
Macreedy reaches for the phone book.
Macreedy thinks it over and comes to a swift decision. He
checks the phone book. Then, picking up phone...
a cubbyhole behind the hotel clerk's desk in the lobby. At
the switchboard is Pete, and above him tacked on the wall is
the sign:
CAMERA PULLS BACK revealing Smith standing beside him. The
two men exchange a nod.
Macreedy slowly puts down the phone. Doc sips his milk, all
the while staring queasily over the glass at Macreedy. He
puts it down, his gaze still fixed on the stranger...
He goes to a topographic map hanging on the wall -- a large,
impressive map -- faded, fly-blown and divided into sections.
He moves to photograph beside the map on the wall -- a large,
impressive photograph of a placer mine in operation.
He moves to his desk, picks up a glistening blob of stone,
resting next to an assayer's scales, and examines it...
He bangs the rock down next to the scales.
He moves to a third illustration -- a colored reproduction,
large and impressive -- of acres upon green acres of produce
in bloom; the kind of picture Southern Pacific places above
its calendars.
He moves to the coffins piled in a corner and runs his hand
down the smooth pine sides with loving tenderness.
Doc nods; he points vaguely toward the street...
Macreedy snares the key and walks out. Doc gets up to follow
him.
An old-fashioned hearse, with plate glass sides and elaborate
lead candelabra -- Doc's "limousine" -- is parked a few steps
from the door. Macreedy climbs in behind the wheel as Doc
comes out and stands on the small back porch.
Macreedy turns on the ignition switch. His foot kicks over
the starter, but the spark doesn't catch. He tries again,
then again. He pauses, frowns, as Doc comes down from the
porch and joins him.
Again he presses the ignition switch. Nothing. And suddenly,
in b.g., the great bulk of Hector David looms up, leaning
against the porch pillar at the corner of the alleyway. His
expression is almost dreamy. For a moment he stands there
while Macreedy toys with the ignition and the sick engine
wheezes and grinds. Then he ambles up to the hearse...
Macreedy takes the cigarette, lighting a match with one hand.
He puts the fire to Doc's smoke and then lights his own. He
inhales, exhales, thinking. Finally...
Macreedy gets out of the car. Hector has already opened the
hood. Doc peers nervously over his shoulder. As they study
the engine, Hector's horsey face appears behind them. He
gestures toward the engine.
Focal point: a hopeless snarl of ignition wires.
Slowly he takes off his wrist watch and puts it in his pants
pocket.
Ignoring Hector, he bends over the engine, controlling his
obvious awareness that Hector has fouled up the ignition.
Hector's eyes go hard. He reaches out suddenly, one great
hand closing over the distributor cap. He yanks, ripping the
feed wires out of their sockets.
Still gripping the wires, he walks off. Doc simmers down. He
turns to face Macreedy, who hasn't moved. Now Macreedy slowly
lowers the hood of the car.
He walks off. Doc looks after him grimly.
Macreedy stands at the high counter, writing on a Postal
Telegraph blank. Behind the counter, watching him nervously,
is Hastings. At the agent's elbow is a big pitcher with dew
on the glass. It holds a pale liquid and a chunk of ice. His
eyes on Macreedy, Hastings refills a glass tumbler. He takes
a gulp as Macreedy puts down the pencil and pushes the message
toward him. Now Hastings puts down his glass, picks up the
form and scans it hurriedly. He looks at Macreedy, eyes glazed
with anxiety...
Hastings again refills his glass, slopping the liquid over
on the counter. He picks up the glass, hesitates, offers it
awkwardly to Macreedy.
Macreedy shakes his head. No.
He drinks, puts down the glass. Macreedy pushes the bill
across the counter toward him. Hastings picks it up gingerly
then pauses...
Macreedy turns and walks out. Hastings stands sweating,
staring hard at the message in his hand as...
Sequence omitted from original script.
A few loafers are at the bar, draped bonelessly on high
stools. There is the usual array of bottles and glasses
aligned before a cracked, discolored mirror. In the corner
is a jukebox. Along the opposite wall is a line of low stools
facing a counter covered with oil-cloth thumb-tacked in place.
Behind it is a greasy hot plate and a couple of soiled
displays -- breakfast food, soft drinks, etc. At the grill
counter is Sam, cleaning his finger-nails with a toothpick.
At the bar, engaged in a worrisome conversation, are four
loafers, FRANKLIN KROOL, WALT MURTRY, RON BENTHAM and STERLING
He looks up, and something makes him hesitate...
stopping in front of the restaurant. On the window large,
rough capital letters in water paint proclaim:
Macreedy pauses, shrugs and then enters.
Sam is still working on his finger nails. He evidences little
interest in the stranger, but at the bar in b.g. the loafers
stiffen. Macreedy takes a stool in front of Sam.
Macreedy winces.
The door of the Bar & Grill opens. Smith and Coley enter.
They walk to Macreedy, stopping just a few feet behind him.
He turns again as Sam plops an unseasonable mess of chili in
front of him.
Macreedy smiles tiredly. He half turns toward Coley.
He gets up, with his chili, and sits down three stools away.
Coley straddles the stool Macreedy has vacated. He squirms
on it, his movements exaggerated. Now he spins to face Smith.
Coley opens his mouth but, realizing he has been
outmaneuvered, closes it again. The loafers in b.g. are
silent, watching. Sam, seemingly oblivious to Coley's pressure
on Macreedy, places a bottle of ketchup in front of the
stranger. Coley gets up slowly and walks stiff-legged to
Macreedy. He takes the bottle of ketchup and, without removing
the cap, upends it over Macreedy's plate. The cap is drowned
in a deluge of ketchup which overflows the plate and runs
onto the counter.
Macreedy rises to go out. As he passes Coley, Coley takes
his limp left arm and spins him slowly but firmly around.
The two men face each other.
Macreedy shakes free of Coley's grasp. Coley lunges. His big
right fist streaks toward Macreedy's face. Macreedy ducks,
weaving with the punch. He grabs Coley's belt, twisting
Coley's body. The momentum of the swing throws Coley off
balance. As he goes past Macreedy, the stranger tugs at his
belt, twisting him to one side. He plants his left foot firmly
on the toes of Coley's left boot, for a split second anchoring
Coley in place. He chops the under side of his open hand in
a short, vicious arc that lands solidly under Coley's ear.
With the same motion, he brings the heel of his hand hard
against and slightly under the tip of Coley's nose. The
cartilage shatters. Blood spills down his face. Following
through, Macreedy's elbow smashes beneath Coley's cheekbone.
Macreedy's arm goes past the astonished, wind-burned face,
finding Coley's right wrist. He jerks the wrist out and
backward. It snaps. Coley whimpers, his face twisted in pain
and perplexity. His body lolls forward. Macreedy steps back.
He raises his right shoulder a few inches. His bent right
arm drives up like a piston attached to the shoulder's lift.
Fist and arm seem all one rigid piece with only the limber
shoulder giving them motion. The fist strikes Coley's face,
covering for a moment one side of his chin and a corner of
his mouth between cheekbone and jawbone. Coley shuts his
eyes and falls unconscious.
Smith, a puzzled expression on his face, watches Coley fall.
He takes half a step toward him. Macreedy looks at Smith.
Smith stops. Macreedy's face is wooden, with a trace of
sullenness around the hard lines of his mouth. Working
methodically, Macreedy frisks Coley. He takes from a pocket
a long, ugly knife. He snaps the spring and the four-inch
blade leaps into place. He looks at the knife in his hand
and then at Smith. He smiles gently, even dreamily.
Macreedy walks slowly toward him, holding the knife. The are
only three feet apart. Smith's hand goes to a pocket, closes
inside over the outline of a pistol. Sam glances from Macreedy
to Smith to the unconscious Coley. He sidles toward the door
and runs out fast. (NOTE: From this point to end of scene
INTERCUT from Macreedy and Smith to exploit the reactions of
the loafers at the bar.)
With a quick motion, he tosses the knife to Smith. Smith
catches it.
He walks past Smith and goes out the door. Self-consciously
holding the knife, Smith turns to face the loafers at the
bar. They say nothing; they stare at him, through him, like
a panel of ghouls. The door opens, admitting Sam and Doc,
who carries his little black medical bag. Doc looks at Coley.
He goes to Coley, bending down over him. Smith has remained
motionless as a monument. Now he doubles shut the knife in
his hand. He pockets it, and without even glancing at Coley,
turns quickly and goes out.
Doc sits deep in the battered upholstery of one of the chairs.
He stares fiercely across the room at Smith who is on the
couch, reading a neatly folded newspaper. Behind him at the
clerk's desk, Pete is fitfully involved in a game of
solitaire. At the foot of the stairs Hector is pouring change
into a slot machine. It whines, grinds, and clicks with
rhythmic monotony, but it never seems to pay off. In the
chair nearest Doc is Tim, with one of his boots off. He works
hard and with some concentration, removing the other. Then
he places them neatly at the foot of his chair. He wiggles
his toes -- watching them with some interest.
The wheeze and whir of the slot machine stops. The sudden
silence turns the eyes of the men toward Hector and the one-
arm bandit. They follow his gaze up the steps.
walks down, carrying his suitcase. He goes to Pete at the
clerk's desk.
As Macreedy turns from the desk, Doc joins him.
Smith coolly continues to read his paper. It is Hector who
turns toward Doc...
Macreedy ignores the exchange of words. He walks across the
frayed carpet to the nearest chair and drops into it. Doc,
who has followed him, stands looking down at Macreedy for a
long moment. Then...
Doc follows his gaze as Hastings enters the lobby and looks
around. He sees Macreedy coming toward him. He walks rigidly
in an arc past Macreedy to Smith. He holds out a Postal
Telegraph form. Smith puts down his paper and takes it.
Macreedy, followed by Doc, goes over to Smith. Tim in his
stockinged feet joins them.
Smith scans the message. He looks up to meet Macreedy's gaze.
Smith rises. Hector swaggers over from the slot machine.
Hastings slips around the back of the couch, protected by
the barricade of Hector's great body.
Hastings is silent. A brittle expression of bemusement crosses
Smith's features.
Macreedy's mouth compresses in a harsh grin.
Macreedy takes a step toward Hastings. The telegraph agent
bounces away.
Tim hesitates, blinking his eyes worriedly, shifting from
one stockinged foot to the other. Smith watches him insolently
as he takes the message from Macreedy and gestures with it
vaguely...
He reaches out, clawing the badge from Tim's chest. He jabs
it on Hector's vest.
Hector moves his elephantine bulk within inches of Macreedy...
Macreedy doesn't answer. Hector takes the message from Tim's
limp hand and tears it into little pieces.
Macreedy doesn't answer.
He walks out, the new Sheriff strutting beside him, with
Hastings in their wake. For a moment Macreedy, Doc and Tim
stand in the center of the lobby. Pete eyes them non-
committally and goes back to his solitaire. He glances up
now and then, moving the cards with a purposeful sort of
slowness, as of a more natural swiftness restrained by his
preoccupation with the three men in the lobby.
Macreedy is deep in thought. Abstractedly he tugs at his
collar and then repeats the ritual of lighting a cigarette.
Tim's shoulders are slumped. Humiliation has corroded him,
flesh and soul. Even Doc is momentarily subdued; he too,
feels degraded, unclean. Macreedy looks from one to the other
of the good, ineffectual companions that circumstance has so
haphazardly tossed his way. He takes a few steps to his
suitcase, Doc and Tim trailing him; Doc, for want of something
better to do; Tim, out of his deep, inexpressible need for
support. Macreedy takes an untapped bottle of whiskey from
his bag. He thumbs the cork loose and holds the bottle out
to Tim. Tim takes a drink.
The light on the clerk's desk goes on, and we are aware that
day has gone and that night is falling. The pressing, fierce
light has drained from the lobby, leaving a shadowy, silvery
dreariness. The shadows have lengthened and the silver has
tarnished with the darkness.
Pete comes out from behind the desk, walking from one lamp
in the lobby to another, turning them on.
He hands Doc the whiskey bottle.
He downs a snort, then looks at Pete, who approaches them.
As Pete turns on the lamp behind Doc, he reacts ever so
slightly to Doc's words. His almost imperceptible grimace is
not lost on Macreedy. Macreedy watches the young man as he
continues to light the lamps...
Doc slams the whiskey bottle down on a nearby table.
Self-consciously Pete has backed off until now he leans
against the outside of the clerk's desk. But he still can't
shut his ears to what Doc is saying...
Tim sighs, running a thick hand over his forehead...
There is a moment of crashing silence. Then...
Slowly he lumbers out of the lobby. Doc watches him go. Again
the benumbing silence, cut finally, unexpectedly by...
His right hand closes over the neck of the whiskey bottle on
the end table. Abstractedly fingering it, he walks with tense,
deliberate steps toward Pete at the desk.
He continues to advance inexorably toward Pete.
He is now within a couple of yards of Pete.
For a moment Pete stares at Macreedy, terribly disturbed by
the incisiveness of Macreedy's analysis. Then...
In sudden frustration, Pete grabs the deck of cards on the
clerk's desk and slams them down hard. They scatter. He turns,
stares blankly [...] between Doc and Macreedy.
Pete doesn't answer.
Pete nods helplessly, bowing his head. Macreedy sighs, looks
down at the bottle in his hand, slowly puts it on the table...
Silence. Doc, realizing the enormity of Macreedy's admission,
frowns, rubs a hand across his tired eyes. Pete looks at
Macreedy for a long, shocked moment. He shivers.
He takes the bottle from the table and shakily pours a shot
glass of liquor. As he raises it to his mouth...
Pete is motionless, holding the glass inches from his lips,
hypnotized by Macreedy's voice, as hard and as cold as his
eyes...
Macreedy's hand shoots out, in a short, inexorable arc,
smashing his palm across the shot glass. The whiskey bursts
in a spray, the glass flies halfway across the room,
shattering as it lands against something solid. Pete is
stunned, Doc perplexed, at Macreedy's violence. They stare
at him...
Macreedy's eyes are murky. The creases between the brows
over his nose are deep. His nostrils move in and out with
his breathing. Pete and Doc regard him with growing
uneasiness. Rage comes into Macreedy's face, turning it a
painful red.
Pete squirms under Macreedy's relentless attack.
Macreedy grabs the bottle, shoving it across the table toward
Pete.
Pete pushes the bottle aside, too ravaged by Macreedy's words
and his own thoughts to drink. He shakes his head grimly and
then, with sudden decision, goes to the switchboard and plugs
in a line.
as they exchange a glance. Doc takes a long, deep breath of
relief. Macreedy frowns thoughtfully. He strains to listen
to Liz, but all he (and we) can hear is the staccato jumble
of her words over the wire.
he cuts Liz short...
Again Liz's voice incoherent over the phone, and again...
Slowly he replaces the phone on the switch-board. He comes
around from behind the desk, joining Macreedy and Doc.
Pete and Doc are nervously alert, drained of energy, waiting.
Hector is downright bored. He toys with his pistol, squinting
at it, twirling the barrel. Finding neither interest nor
pleasure in the piece, he jams it back in his holster and
strolls with exaggerated surety out on the porch.
The congregation of loafers look up as Hector emerges. Imbued
with his own bullying importance, he draws the pistol,
maneuvers an extravagant pinwheel and a few other gaudy
tricks. Then he sighs as boredom again takes over. He walks
down the steps to catch a bit of air.
The disappearance of Hector (o.s.) down the street galvanizes
them into action. They hurry out of the lobby toward the
back of the hotel.
Vague in the pallid light escaping through a few back windows.
The hotel's rear door is tightly shut. Around the far corner
of the street (extreme b.g.) comes the gangling body of Hector
David. He walks toward CAMERA. Perhaps twenty-five yards
away he stops to rest against a fence like a leaning tower.
His hand goes to a pocket and comes out with a crumpled half
pack of cigarettes. Suddenly the movement is arrested;
something at the other end of the street captures his bleak
attention.
A jeep, headlights off, slowly turns the corner, pulls up to
the curb and parks.
pockets his cigarettes and starts slowly for the jeep, a
quizzical frown on his horsy face. He approaches the back
door of the hotel, oblivious to it as he continues toward
the jeep.
At the far end b.g., toward the lobby, a single unshaded
light bulb burns dully. A slight figure stands in f.g. To
one side is a narrow U-shaped alcove blanketed in heavy
shadows. The features of the man in the hall and the slim
lines of his body blend vaguely in the darkness. With enormous
care, he turns a knob and opens the door leading to the alley
behind the hotel. Light thrown by the back windows reveals
that the figure is Pete. The same pallid light from the alley,
glancing across the alcove, momentarily illuminates it. Glued
as close to the recessed wall as is humanly possible is Doc.
He is partially shielded by one of those hotel hose wheels
around which an old fire hose is wound. The heavy brass nozzle
of the hose hangs from the end.
Doc grips a twelve-inch length of lead pipe. Pete swallows
nervously and peers outside, first to the right, then to the
left. His eyes glaze with fear, and his jaw tightens with
tension.
as he stares at Hector walking toward the jeep.
Hector stops, turns to face Pete. He hesitates, then...
Then, with a final glance at the jeep, Hector lumbers to
Pete, who disappears inside the hallway.
as Hector enters and stops. Pete quickly closes the door
behind him and walks toward the lobby, attempting to draw
Hector toward the black alcove center screen b.g. But Hector
is not to be sucked in. He glares at Pete, waiting. (NOTE:
The following dialogue is delivered sotto voce.)
He jams a cigarette in his mouth. Pete watches him frantically
as he searches his pockets for a match. He can't find one.
He starts to turn. Hector's pig eyes are slits of suspicion.
Before Pete can move, Hector reaches out, hooking two heavy
fingers inside a pocket of Pete's shirt. Slowly Hector's
expression changes to one of insidious cunning. His fingers
come out of Pete's pocket, and between them is a paper book
of matches.
Pete is unable to answer. He is scared to death.
sweating with frustration. Hector is six feet away, and armed --
too far away for Doc to risk an attack with his lead pipe.
Doc looks around vaguely, wildly, for another weapon. A
fraction of an inch from his nose is the hose wheel. For a
split second he hesitates. Then slowly, with infinite care,
he tightens the heavy brass nozzle and begins to unwind the
hose.
Now Hector is alert. He studies Pete's twitching face.
Elaborately he tears a match from the pack and scratches it.
It takes fire, cupped in the rampart of his big hands. It
lights up the hall, and as Hector looks around he sees
something through a mirror -- over his shoulder and six feet
away Doc materializes out of the shadows of the alcove. As
Hector whirls, going for his gun, Doc swings the hose with
sudden deadly aim. It uncoils like a snake, and the brass
nozzle crashes with a mighty thud across Hector's skull.
Hector groans. He sinks unconscious to the floor. Doc stands
there, paralyzed by his action. Pete tears toward the lobby.
as Pete rushes in. He moves directly to the desk, leans over
and presses the buzzer behind the desk three times. He turns
and runs back toward the rear of the building.
as Macreedy barrels down. He pauses briefly in the hall as
he sees Doc still standing with the hose and the nozzle
dangling like a pendulum from his hand. Their eyes lock
briefly in understanding...
He heads toward the alley.
as Macreedy rushes out. He pauses, looking quickly right,
then left. He sees a jeep parked at the curb far down the
street. He runs toward it. The jeep, its headlights off,
starts for him. He swings onto the moving vehicle, falling
heavily into the seat beside Liz Brooks. He slumps there,
breathing heavily as the jeep, with a grinding of gears,
cuts through the night, picking up speed.
as Pete joins Doc. Silently, motionlessly, the two men stare
for a long moment at Hector -- particularly at the pistol
lying beside him. Then they look at each other, and the same
thought seems to flash in their minds...
as they speed down the long empty ribbon of road. Liz drives
hard. Macreedy turns in the bucket seat, looking back toward
Black Rock.
Macreedy does not answer.
with Liz and Macreedy as she cuts sharply into a crossroad.
She drives skillfully over the knotty road which is little
more than a trail. Her lovely features are distorted with
her discontent and the ache for attention. After a moment
she gives voice to her fantasy...
He does not catch the glance she darts him; his extreme
awareness is anchored not to the girl at his side but to the
terrain ahead.
His eyes strain to sweep the country -- each boulder, each
outcropping, each stunted tree. But substance and shadow are
blurred and fuzzy in the dark night, black on black.
Sequence omitted from original script.
with Macreedy and Liz as it winds to the far end of the
boulders on a trail that drops off into a flat basin. Solid
forms loom up in the darkness; they are unrecognizable, yet
Macreedy senses some tense familiarity with the terrain...
He frowns. Suddenly Liz brakes the jeep -- so sharply Macreedy
lurches forward in the seat.
She moves away from Macreedy to get out of the jeep. He
reaches across quickly, gripping her arm. She turns to face
him, disturbed by his hardness of jaw and eye...
Suddenly they are hit by a blinding pair of headlights like
[...] The beams cut jaggedly through the night, throwing
into sharp immediate relief the lava rocks, the broken
windmill, the gutted house, the litter-strewn, unmarked grave
at Adobe Flat.
Liz throws away the ignition key. Macreedy bails out of the
jeep, still holding the girl.
as they fall to the earth. Macreedy pins her down. Then in
quick succession, four emphatically loud SHOTS from a rifle
squirt into the shale around them.
He looks up blindly into the headlights glaring from the
granitic high ground some 60 yards away. His grip on the
girl's shoulder is like a steel trap. He pushes her down
beside Komako's grave, hugging the side of the jeep as a
SHOT rips the gravel at their feet. Pulling the girl with
him, he takes cover in the slight concavity of the grave.
The jeep is between them and the headlights -- between them
and the source of the gunfire. Liz struggles to break away.
Suddenly bullets kick up a storm around him. A bullet smashes
into the flowers, exploding tiny cruel fragments of dirt
into Macreedy's face. He gasps in pain, releasing Liz. He
rubs his eyes as if to convince himself that he is not blind.
Liz breaks from the grave. Now, five yards from Macreedy...
Liz half turns, facing Macreedy with a vicious smile...
She starts toward the headlights.
She reaches the foot of the rocky ridge, with the two enormous
eyes on top. She begins to climb, up... up...
She is almost at the top; a vertically sheer rock about five
feet high separates her from it. She looks up at Smith,
towering over her at the edge of the precipice. He holds his
rifle almost languorously.
The girl is frightened by the menace in Smith's voice.
He brings the rifle down, aiming almost casually at Liz. Her
eyes go wide. She steps back, spins around, running crazily
down the steep incline.
A SHOT rings out. She falls forward, rolling slowly down the
embankment. She lies there. Blood trickles from the corner
of her pretty mouth. A rattling noise rises from deep in her
throat, and then subsides.
In the silence the outline of Reno Smith emerges. Holding
his rifle at the ready, his silhouette illuminated sharply
in the twin beams of light, he climbs down the side of the
cliff. He looks toward the jeep and Macreedy, not once at
the girl at his feet.
Smith pays no attention to her. He advances inexorably with
rifle held at his hip. He fires at Macreedy.
Macreedy wipes the last of the fragments from his eyes. His
face is still streaked with dirt and shale. He turns,
searching for something, anything, to fight back with. Then
he remembers... Stiffening, his body set, his eyes narrow,
he moves purposefully toward the front of the jeep and crawls
under it. Again Smith opens up on him. Bullet after bullet
pours into the confined space, nicking the wall, ricocheting
off the jeep with a frightening, fluttery, wheezing sound.
The firing stops again and in the silence we HEAR a familiar
TRICKLE, as in running water...
re-loads his rifle. Stiffly, he starts slowly down over the
rocks toward his unarmed victim...
He has unscrewed the nut and unconnected the gas line with
the carburator. A spurt of gasoline is running out. With a
quick motion he picks up an empty whisky bottle from the
litter-strewn earth. He fills it with gasoline, quickly screws
the nut back on. Now he sweeps his necktie free of his collar.
Holding it with his teeth, he tears the felt lining free
from its silk face. He twists half the lining inside the
bottle, knotting the other end securely around the bottle's
neck, leaving a long strand dangling.
moving rigidly toward the hole. He stops, levels his rifle,
fires.
pinned down in the direct line of fire. The burst of the
rifle stops.
not more than twenty-five yards away, advancing carefully,
rifle at the ready.
lights a match, placing the flame to the dangling end of the
tie. It catches. He flings himself to his feet and with the
same motion whips the fiery bottle like a football, hard and
straight toward Smith. Smith fires once, fast and wild. The
bottle crashes against the rocks at his feet and bursts with
a shattering explosion. Smith screams as the razor-sharp
slivers rip his flesh. In a puff of flame, his clothes ignite.
He drops the rifle and goes down, squirming frantically on
the black ashy ground.
favoring Macreedy as he tears out of the hole. He hurls
himself at Smith. Wooden-faced, almost dreamy-eyed, he shovels
the ashy dirt over Smith's prone chest, putting out the fire.
Smith struggles halfway to his feet. Macreedy grabs his
shoulder, helping him up. Smith looks at Macreedy through
eyes bleary with fear and pain and shock.
He drives his right fist against Smith's chin. Smith's head
snaps back as far as it can go and then wobbles to rest on
his chest. He collapses. Macreedy blows out his breath hard.
He staggers to Liz. As he bends over her...
Liz's jeep, driven by Macreedy, rolls slowly down the empty
main street of the sleeping town. Behind him, under a tarp,
the body of the girl lies lifeless across the seat. On the
seat beside him is Smith's rifle, the balance a few inches
from Macreedy's elbow. On the right front fender of the jeep
Smith sits precariously, his shirt scorched and ragged. He
wears a sullen expression of pained indifference.
In b.g., as the jeep passes, isolated lights go on, first in
Doc's house, then in two or three others. Macreedy is
oblivious to them.
almost completely hidden, looks out grimly from a corner of
the jail window. Protruding through the bars, swiveling to
follow the progress of the jeep down the street, is the long,
ugly muzzle of a rifle.
as Macreedy pulls up to the curb in front of the jail and
cuts the ignition. He grabs the rifle, and steps around to
Smith.
Smith complies.
as Macreedy marches Smith up the steps. The jail door opens.
A man emerges, wearing a Mackinaw over his vest and carrying
a rifle. It is Tim. For a moment Macreedy eyes him in silence.
His gun finger tightens on the rifle in his hand. Tim's rifle,
too, is at the ready...
The SOUND of running feet padding along the dirt road
increases on SOUND TRACK. Macreedy turns slightly, to see
Doc huffing toward him. The older man climbs the jail steps
and comes to an abrupt halt, his eyes going from one to the
other of the two men in the stand-off.
He pulls Tim's Mackinaw to one side, revealing the silver-
plated star pinned at the breast.
Macreedy swings his rifle from Tim to Smith. Tim lowers his,
stepping to one side, allowing Smith, covered by Macreedy,
to enter the jail. He goes in, Doc following. Pete sits
silently at Tim's desk.
In one of the two cells are Coley and Hector. In the other,
Sam and Hastings.
Tim turns his key in the cell door. Macreedy tiredly goes to
Pete at the desk.
Pete rises. Macreedy halts him momentarily, gripping his
arm...
Pete walks dazedly out the door. Tim grabs Smith's shoulder
and propels him roughly through the cell door. He slams it
hard. As the clatter of the iron door reverberates harshly...
The townspeople, with Doc f.g., are gathered silently in the
street, staring sadly, dumbly at the hotel before them. Doc
wears a dark business suit, neat and conservative. The door
opens (o.s.) and the people look up, their eyes lighting
with expectancy.
Macreedy comes out of the door, carrying his suitcase. For a
moment he pauses, looking at the uplifted faces of the people
in the street. In the distance we HEAR the horn of a stream-
liner. Macreedy goes down the steps, skirts the watching
crowd and heads for the railroad station. Almost immediately
Doc falls in step with him. The townspeople, still silent,
trail after them
in f.g., the townspeople behind them. In b.g., as we pass,
we see the main street just as we saw it when Macreedy entered
town a few short hours ago.
Doc nods. He blinks and frowns...
A NOISE o.s. attracts Macreedy's attention. He turns, as do
Doc and the townsmen.
In front of the jail, each of them handcuffed, are Smith,
Coley, Hector, Sam and Hastings. Tim and four cops escort
them to two State Police cars which are parked beside Tim's
old sedan and another car (presumably belonging to a member
of the press). The newspaperman (WITHOUT A PRESS CARD IN HIS
HAT) stands to one side with Pete. Pete as well as Tim have
changed clothes; they look clean and trim. Coley has his arm
in a sling. Hector's hat hides the bandage on his head.
Macreedy resumes walking toward the abandoned station, with
Doc at his side and the people behind him. The train pulls
in.
Macreedy is silent. He walks on, to the platform. He pauses,
looking at the people silently in his wake and then at Doc.
He takes a black velvet-covered box from his pocket -- the
box containing the medal -- looks at it, and slowly hands it
to Doc.
Macreedy turns and exits from SHOT. The people look after
him.
as Macreedy boards the train.
The cars in front of the jail U-turn and start off with the
prisoners. The people move silently toward the train.
Macreedy is at the passageway. Slowly the train moves out.
Macreedy and a conductor stand at the doorway. The town is
seen behind them and the people standing there. In the
distance, Tim's car recedes.
He walks into the train.
gathering speed, diminishing, far, far into the horizon.
Note from page [9]: (1) The sign should be of whatever type
is feasible and compatible to terrain, emphasizing the
remoteness of Black Rock. It should list three cities with
arrows pointing in the proper directions:

A civilization is destroyed only when its gods are destroyed.
Bare as all hell. The trees stripped of their bark and white
like ghosts. Some torn violently from their roots and felled.
STARK GRAY SUNLIGHT shafts between the trees, clouded by a
creeping fog that obscures the true color of everything. A
LIGHT SNOW flutters. The world monochrome, lifeless and cold.
A CAT prowls across the dead earth. Barely recognizable as
the domestic breed it might once have been. Its fur mangy and
rank, body rib-thin from starvation. Entirely feral.
It moves slowly, cautiously. Sniffing the air, scanning the
forest, alert. Trusting nothing of its surroundings. It paces
across a leaf-strewn clearing, closing stealthily on:
A DEAD MAN, splayed face-down in the earth. His feet bare.
Face frozen in a grim death mask. A GAPING GUNSHOT WOUND in
his head, the dried blood caked around it matting his hair.
As the cat moves closer, approaching warily:
About thirty yards away. Someone is watching. Waiting. SLOW,
DEEP BREATHS, heard through a GASMASK RESPIRATOR.
The MIRRORED LENSES reflecting the forest clearing, locked
onto the cat. The slow, metered breathing continues.
THE CAT slows, but continues pacing toward the corpse. More
cautious than ever. It inches forward, sniffing at the body.
ON THE WATCHER. Crouched behind the mangled stump of a felled
tree. Concealed beneath a camouflaging mesh of leaves, twigs
and bracken. A "ghillie suit" of the kind used by snipers.
THE CAT sniffs at the dead man's hand, frozen by death in a
grotesquely contorted claw. The animal still unsure. Looks
around again, checking its surroundings for predators.
THE WATCHER moves almost imperceptibly. The leaves covering
him rustle ever so slightly as we hear - just barely - the
familiar creaking sound of a BOW STRING BEING DRAWN TAUT.
THE CAT hears it. Looks up, alert. Staring right at the
watcher, but he is too well camouflaged to be seen. An
interminable, tense BEAT - is the prey going to flee?
Finally, the cat turns its attention back to the carcass,
nibbling gingerly at the flesh of the man's fingers.
THE WATCHER looses the arrow. It sails across the clearing
and SKEWERS THE CAT clean through. It drops to the ground.
THE WATCHER STANDS, shaking off the ghillie suit, revealing
him to us for the first time.
He wears a weather-beaten knee-length duster. Hooded sweater
with more layers beneath that. Torn pants and scuffed work
boots. Everything filthy and battered from years of wear.
Along with the goggles, his face remains obscured by a
DISPOSABLE PAPER DUST MASK and a CRUDELY-FASHIONED FUR HAT
with dangling ear flaps that may once itself have been a cat.
Around his neck he wears a silver SAINT CHRISTOPHER PENDANT
hanging from a frayed twine cord.
His name is ELI.
He shoulders the bow and walks across the clearing. Crouches
beside the dead cat and pulls out the arrow. Wipes the blood
from the shaft, then reaches down to collect the body.
Suddenly the cat SCREECHES AND FLAILS WILDLY! Eli recoils,
falling backward, stunned, as the cat - MORTALLY WOUNDED BUT
FIGHTING TO THE DEATH - bites and claws desperately at him.
Eli struggles violently with the cat, wrestling it to the
ground and grabbing up a HUNK OF FALLEN BRANCH. He holds the
writhing animal down and CLUBS IT until it lays still.
He sits back, breathing harder than the dustmask will allow.
He yanks it down, revealing the dirty, unshaven face beneath.
Impossible to tell his age, but certainly not a young man.
For a moment he just sits there. Then bundles up the dead cat
and returns to the mangled tree stump. Folds away his ghillie
suit into a nearby RUCKSACK which he hauls up onto his back.
A canteen dangles from the backpack, a SHOTGUN strapped to
its side. Eli reaches down for his final possession - an old
SAMURAI SWORD in a scabbard which he slings across his back.
He gazes up at the sky. A snowflake drifts down and lands on
his cheek. He reaches up and brushes it away, leaving a BLACK
SMEAR on his face. Not snow after all, but some kind of ASH.
Eli emerges from the treeline onto the cracked and ruptured
asphalt. Lined by more of those ghostly, stripped-bare trees.
He sniffs the air, breathing it in. Checks the road in both
directions. Deserted. A few yards away is the rusted, burned-
out chassis of a CAR. He heads toward it.
The car rests half on the road, half in the adjacent ditch.
Stripped of its tires and engine. In the driver's seat is a
MUMMIFIED BODY. A BULLET HOLE piercing its forehead.
Eli regards the body dispassionately. Tries the door handle
but it's jammed. He yanks on it harder and eventually
wrenches it open. He leans in and checks the man's feet.
They're bare. No shoes or socks. Eli curses under his breath.
He leaves the car behind and heads on down the road. As he
walks away, we see that the sole of one of his boots has worn
loose, held in place now only by a rubber band.
Eli continues down the road. He ambles along slowly, a man in
no hurry. A man who has been walking a long time.
The road has since emerged from the forest. Passing now
through a wasteland of dead scrub brush and urban junk.
The sun beats down from directly overhead. The sky has no
color to it, paper-white. The unfiltered sun's stark light
leaves everything seeming bleached-out, over-exposed.
CRANE UP as Eli walks on. On the horizon is the silhouette of
a CITY. Or what was once a city. Columns of BLACK SMOKE rise
from within, casting a deathly pall over the skyline. BURNED
AND BROKEN SKYSCRAPERS jut out like tombstones.
Eli reaches a fork in the road and stops. The road he's on
appears to wind off in the direction of the ruined city on
the horizon. The other fork continues on into the wasteland.
After a brief pause, Eli changes direction and heads off down
the other fork, away from the city.
Little more than a main street lined with storefronts. Eli
walks steadily along, side-stepping rubble and debris.
Ignoring the petrified corpses lying in the street.
He passes by abandoned stores, every one picked clean. Empty
shelves, smashed windows. Looted and burned. He doesn't even
look inside, knowing already that he will find nothing.
Until he comes to a store that does cause him to stop. An old-
fashioned sign squeaks on rusted hinges in the breeze.
He steps into the doorway and pushes open the door. It swings
open on its one remaining hinge before splintering away from
the frame and crashing to the floor in a cloud of dust.
Eli steps inside. Like all the others, the store has been
cleaned out. Shoe racks and empty boxes strewn over the
floor. The whole place reeking of dead, musty air.
Eli looks around, just to be sure. Drags his sheathed sword
idly along the empty racks as he checks them. Nothing.
As he turns back for the door, his foot nudges against a shoe
box. It's not empty. He crouches down, flips the lid off
hopefully... and pulls out a LADY'S HIGH-HEELED SHOE.
He strokes the shoe leather with his hand. Shakes his head
grimly, then tosses the shoe back into the box and leaves.
On the outskirts of town. In disrepair - peeling paint,
broken windows, damp-stained walls - but habitable.
Eli stands in the front yard, surrounded by brownish,
overgrown weeds. Thinking it over. Turns to face the setting
sun. It will be dark soon. He turns back toward the house.
The front door is sent CRASHING OPEN with a hard kick,
revealing Eli silhouetted in the fading sunlight. The shotgun
unhitched from his pack and held ready. He moves inside.
Another dead place. Flies buzzing in the still, dank air.
Everything covered in a thick layer of dust but otherwise
largely preserved. An eerie snapshot of a world long gone.
Every cupboard empty. Eli checks each one, poking around in
the dark corners with his sword, but finds nothing but dust.
He opens the freezer, checks inside. Empty save for a small
ICEBOX. The lid stuck fast with mildew and gunk. Eli digs at
it with his grimy fingernails and manages to pry it open.
Inside are the wizened, petrified remains of a HUMAN HAND.
Floating in slimy, discolored water. The smell vile and thick
enough to make Eli retch. He quickly jams the lid back on.
A wooden bedframe stripped clean. The dresser drawers have
been emptied and lie strewn across the floor. Eli moves
toward a large walk-in closet and opens the door.
No clothes inside - just the near-fossilized corpse of a MAN
HANGING BY A NOOSE. Twisting gently back and forth.
Unfazed, Eli crouches down and checks the man's feet. An old
pair of Converse All-Stars hang limp from the man's skeletal
ankles. Eli calmly sets about unlacing them.
He checks the size; they're a fit. He upturns each shoe and
shakes the old flakes of mummified flesh from them. Discards
his ruined boots and puts on the sneakers, laces them up.
He walks around, pacing up and down, getting a feel for the
new shoes. They feel good. For the first time, he smiles.
Eli sits in the corner, roasting the carcass of the dead cat
over a small CAMPFIRE. He cleans the animal's pelts as he
watches it cook. Pokes at the meat with a pen-knife, checking
it for done-ness. It appears ready to eat.
He clasps his hands together in prayer.
He speaks QUIETLY, his voice barely above a whisper. Even so,
we catch the accent - a RASPY, OLD-WORLD MIDWEST DRAWL, like
John Wayne or some other long-forgotten western icon.
He signs a cross over himself, then uses the knife to saw off
a chunk of meat. Takes a bite, savoring the taste with great
relish. To him, it's grade-A filet mignon.
It appears as though he is talking to himself... until a RAT
emerges from his coat pocket, whiskers twitching keenly. Eli
offers it some meat. The rat gnaws enthusiastically at it.
The last of the waning sunlight shafts through the bedroom's
broken window. Eli rummages through his backpack, pulls out a
SMALL PACKAGE wrapped in cloth and tied fast with string.
He sits back in his corner and carefully unwraps it. It's an
OLD LEATHER-BOUND BOOK. The binding cracked and pages dog-
eared, thumbed through a thousand times and more.
Eli gazes lovingly at it. Lets his fingers play across the
beat-up old leather cover. A cherished thing.
He begins to read, half-hidden in the shadows of the fading
sunlight. Silently mouthing the words as he reads them.
Eli closes the book and parcels it back up as before.
Replaces it in his pack, then reaches in for something else.
A CAR BATTERY. Old and streaked with acid stains. Attached to
a tangled bunch of ELECTRICAL WIRING and JUMPER CABLES. Eli
reaches into his pocket and produces:
AN IPOD. Badly beat-up, the case pretty much held together
with duct tape. But functional. Eli attaches the battery
cable to the iPod and places the headphones in his ears.
The music plays. Mozart's Piano Concerto No. 20 in D Minor.
Eli rests back against the wall and pushes the volume way up.
THE MUSIC SWELLS. Eli's fingers dance and swoop in the air,
as though conducting an orchestra, as he is transported by
the music to another world, a world far from this one.
Sunlight shafts through the window. Eli sits slumped in the
exact same position, headphones still in his ears. Asleep.
The rat scurries up Eli's chest and licks his face. Slowly,
he wakes, realizing he fell asleep with his music still on.
Checks the battery. It's dead, drained overnight. He frowns.
He gets to his feet, moves to the window and checks outside.
All seems quiet. He loads up his backpack and weapons.
The rat scurries up his leg, onto his duster and disappears
into the breast pocket. Eli turns and moves out.
The gate squeaks shut behind Eli as he exits the front yard.
He breathes in the air, turns to feel the warm morning sun on
his face. Then turns away from it and walks on down the road.
The landscape barren and featureless, road lined with dead
trees. Eli walks along the warped and broken asphalt.
The road is strewn with burned-out cars and debris from a
world long dead. A warped metal sign by the side of the road
reads: LITTER REMOVAL NEXT TWO MILES BY: "CIRCUIT CITY".
Up ahead is a HUNCHED FIGURE by the side of the road. Eli
arrives to see that it's a YOUNG WOMAN. Bone-thin, dressed in
filthy rags. Skin plagued by an unpleasant rash.
The SHOPPING CART she was pushing has overturned into a
roadside ditch, spilling its contents. Blankets, tins of
food, old clothes. She's on her knees trying to gather it up.
She looks up as she sees Eli approaching. Instantly cowers
from him, raising her hands to protect herself. Terrified.
She offers him a can of pet food with a trembling hand. Eli
stands there looking at her. His expression impossible to
read behind the mirrored goggles.
Eli bends down and picks up a couple of the cart's spilled
contents. Steps forward and offers them to her.
She blinks. Unsure. Cautiously she reaches out and takes it.
Eli looks at the cart. It has come to rest in the ditch just
inches from a THICK BRACKEN HEDGEROW that lines the road.
He looks again at the girl. Her faded blouse is unbuttoned,
revealing a little cleavage. Her skirt torn along the leg,
showing more than a little thigh. Almost deliberate.
He sniffs the air. Watches the hedgerow warily. Just like the
cat he hunted, his senses heightened and on alert.
Behind the hedge, THREE ROADSIDE BANDITS are crouched,
waiting to pounce. Each armed with a crude blunt weapon. They
exchange anxious looks.
ELI sniffs the air again - then backs away from the girl.
The girl's face falls as Eli backs up. The three bandits
EMERGE FROM THE HEDGEROW, brandishing their weapons. A couple
of them wear old sunglasses and goggles similar to Eli's.
The BANDIT LEADER grabs the girl by a fistful of hair as he
passes, yanking her painfully to her feet.
He pushes her away, she crumples to the road in a heap.
Eli backs away, but TWO MORE ARMED BANDITS drop from hiding
in the trees behind, cutting off his escape, surrounding him.
BANDIT #2 notices the shotgun strapped to the pack.
The bandit leader steps forward aggressively. Now within
striking distance of Eli. He grins, teeth filthy and rotten.
Eli remains perfectly calm. And though he speaks with a soft,
even tone, there is something formidable about his voice.
BEAT. The bandit leader looks at Eli incredulously... and
then LAUGHS. The other bandits laugh along nervously.
Eli doesn't move, doesn't say a word. The bandit leader takes
another step forward and shoves him in the shoulder.
The other bandits exchange nervous looks. This is not how
it's supposed to go.
He lunges forward, grabs the shoulder strap of Eli's pack.
If you blinked, you missed it. But somehow Eli has now drawn
his sword. A RIVULET OF BLOOD snakes down along the blade and
drips onto the asphalt.
Bandit leader's hand is still gripped firmly around Eli's
shoulder strap. But it's no longer connected to his arm. The
SEVERED HAND hangs there from the strap, dripping blood.
Bandit leader staggers backward and raises the bloody stump
where his hand once was. Looks at it in shock and horror.
Eli pries the hand loose from the strap and tosses it onto
the road as bandit leader's legs give out and he slumps to
the asphalt. His eyes dart around, as though confused.
A tense BEAT. And then the four remaining bandits ATTACK ELI
ALL AT ONCE, weapons flailing.
Eli flourishes the sword. A BLUR, TOO FAST TO FOLLOW. But
it's clear he is possessed of an inhuman level of skill.
It is over in moments. The four bandits LAY SLAIN IN THE
ROAD, blood pooling out onto the asphalt.
The bandit leader crawls toward his severed hand, a few yards
away. Eli steps in and kicks it out of his reach.
Bandit leader looks up to see the figure of Eli bearing down
on him, silhouetted ominously against the sun. He looks for a
moment like an avenging angel, something not of this world.
And with that, Eli runs him through with his sword.
He turns to see the young woman slumped in the road, sobbing.
She cowers again as he approaches, certain that she is next.
He WALKS PAST HER. Sheathes his sword, then pulls out the
shopping cart from the ditch and rights it. The woman watches
incredulously as he gathers up her supplies into the cart.
She looks at him, puzzled.
Eli says nothing. Walks back to the slain bandits, crouches
beside them and begins searching their bodies.
He takes a scarf from around the neck of one. Finds a Zippo
lighter on another, checks that it works and pockets it.
The five bodies are lined neatly in the ditch, half-covered
with dirt. The best burial they are going to get.
Eli stands before them, head bowed in prayer. He speaks
quietly and quickly, a speech he has given many times.
The young woman stands a few yards away, watching him,
transfixed. She has never seen anyone like him.
He turns and walks away down the road, passing the woman.
He doesn't even turn back to look at her.
He walks on, into the horizon.
Straddling the desert like a giant, crumbling monument to a
long-dead civilization. Eli steadily climbs his way up.
He comes to an abrupt stop as we realize suddenly that the
overpass has COLLAPSED at mid-point. RUSTED IRON RODS jut out
from where the roadway has been severed.
Eli just stands there at the edge for a moment, feeling the
wind whip around him, his coat fluttering in the breeze.
The overpass's collapsed section is now just a MOUNTAINOUS
PILE OF RUBBLE that leads down to the road below.
Eli steps onto the rubble. About to make his way down when he
FREEZES. He hears something. The faintest of sounds. He takes
cover, peering down at the road beneath the overpass to see:
TWO PEOPLE walking together on the road. We see everything
from ELI'S P.O.V. - too far to make out much detail, but
apparently it is a MIDDLE-AGED COUPLE.
The man pushes along an OLD WHEELBARROW covered by a tarp as
the woman, seemingly his wife, walks alongside. The barrow's
rusted wheel gives out a plaintive, rhythmic SQUEAK.
Eli ducks down again as he hears something else. This time
much louder. The menacing growl of MOTORCYCLE ENGINES.
FOUR BIKES IN TOTAL. Riding out of the horizon, closing in on
the couple. They see the bikes coming and panic. Try
desperately to steer the barrow off the road.
The bikes screech to a halt and the FOUR RIDERS dismount.
Brandishing a variety of weapons. The couple make a run for
it but they're quickly chased down and tackled to the ground.
The woman SCREAMS and struggles helplessly as the bikers
swarm over the man like a pack of predatory animals.
The woman is pulled to the ground and the clothes stripped
from her. Eli turns away. He knows what comes next.
Eli listens as the woman screams and screams. He reaches for
his shotgun... hesitates... then withdraws his hand.
Eli repeats it like a mantra. He clearly wants to intervene,
but will not permit himself to. Instead, he simply sits and
waits grimly as the woman continues to scream for help. And
then finally, suddenly, is silenced.
Down below, the bodies of the man and woman lay dead and
bloodied in the dirt. The bikers tear the tarp from the
wheelbarrow, spilling its contents onto the asphalt.
They ferret through the items, scavenging a few items - we
don't see what - and stuffing them into an old cloth satchel.
They leave the rest strewn in the road and ride off in the
direction they came, dust pluming in their wake.
Eli waits until the sound of the motorcycles has receded into
the far distance before emerging from his hiding place.
Eli crouches on one knee before the murdered couple. He signs
a cross over their ravaged bodies as he mutters a prayer
under his breath. Then stands and continues on down the road.
More desolate wasteland as far as the eye can see. The road
forks again here. Eli arrives at the junction and stops.
The road Eli is on leads further into the west. The other
fork heads toward a SMALL TOWN just visible on the horizon.
A HAND-PAINTED SIGN has been driven into the dirt nearby. No
words, just a series of CRUDE PICTOGRAMS. A BED. A PLATE OF
FOOD. A WATER FAUCET. AN ARROW points toward the town.
Eli pauses, thinking it over. Retrieves the iPod from his
pocket. Clicks the button, but no response. He sighs.
He turns and heads down the other fork, toward town.
A primitive, sprawling village of tents and barn-like
structures. Built from corrugated iron, rotted wood, molded
plastic, tarpaulin - materials scavenged from the old world.
HUDDLED RESIDENTS are dressed in little more than rags, many
wearing goggles like Eli's to shield their eyes from the sun.
Eli stands at the edge of town. Reluctant to enter, but he
braces himself and walks on in. And as he rounds a corner,
entering the center of town, an astonishing sight:
The broad thoroughfare now all that remains of whatever town
once stood here. Many of the old storefronts still largely
intact but patched up with salvaged materials. The asphalt
street warped and cracked, parking meters bent and smashed.
It's a lot like the abandoned town Eli passed through
earlier, except VERY MUCH ALIVE - BUSTLING WITH TOWNSFOLK.
It's at once a familiar and also a disturbing sight - like an
old Norman Rockwell painting of classic small-town America,
but filtered through the devastating eye of an apocalypse. An
unsettling juxtaposition of the old world and the new.
The centerpiece of the town is a GRAND THEATER at the head of
the main street. THE PALLADIUM. Like the rest of the town,
badly damaged and shoddily fixed-up. But still standing.
Eli walks down the street and approaches a BLACKSMITH,
hammering out a metal plate over an anvil outside his store.
The blacksmith doesn't look up from his work but motions
toward a storefront at the far end of the street.
Eli heads down the street. Stopping when he comes across a
STATUE erected in the center of the road. A TALL MAN crudely
fashioned in clay. One hand placed paternally on the head of
a SMALL CHILD, the other outstretched toward the sun.
As he observes the statue, Eli notices that passing residents
take a moment to PAUSE AND GENUFLECT before it. Worshipping.
Curious, Eli reaches up and runs his hand over the statue's
face. Then hears SHUFFLING FEET behind him and turns as a
PARADE OF EMACIATED MEN AND WOMEN trudges past. Roped
together at the waist, each man leading the one behind.
Heads shaved, thin from malnutrition. And each one BLIND.
They gaze at the ground with pale, dead eyes. They carry
picks, shovels and other tools - a sightless CHAIN GANG.
Eli watches as the pathetic parade shuffles past, herded like
cattle by a brutish CHAIN GANG BOSS who swats at them with a
stick to keep them moving and indicate direction.
The gang boss glares at Eli as he passes by. Eli doesn't
return the look, just continues crossing the street as the
blind are herded away. Headed toward a wooden building with a
pictogram of a LIGHTNING BOLT suspended above the door.
Whatever this place once was, it's now a kind of POST-
APOCALYPTIC RADIO SHACK. Shelves display a variety of goods.
Engine parts. Old electrical wiring. Small appliances.
An old ELECTRIC GENERATOR rumbles noisily, powering strings
of multi-colored CHRISTMAS LIGHTS that hang all around.
Behind the main counter a convoluted Rube Goldberg-esque
STILL is running. An ENGINEER in a leather apron pours the
remnants of a can of motor oil into the still's funnel.
Attached to the still is an old MOTORCYCLE MIRROR. In its
reflection the engineer sees Eli checking out the store.
Without turning around, he reaches surreptitiously behind the
counter for something.
Eli turns toward the counter - to find the engineer training
a PUMP-ACTION SHOTGUN right at him.
Eli slowly raises his hands.
He nods toward the shotgun visible on Eli's backpack.
The engineer's hands tremble, his finger tight on the
trigger. This man needs to be talked down carefully.
Eli nods. Unhitches the pack and sets it down, steps away.
This seems to make the engineer more suspicious of Eli.
The engineer jerks the shotgun at Eli nervously.
Eli raises his hand and holds it outstretched, palm faced
downward. The engineer watches it closely for any sign of
ticks or tremors, but Eli's hand stays steady as a rock.
The sight of the steady hand seems to reassure the engineer a
little. Finally, he lowers the shotgun.
The engineer raises the shotgun nervously again.
The engineer watches him like a hawk as Eli opens up his pack
and pulls out the car battery. When he sees it, he gasps.
Eli places it on the counter. The engineer looks it over with
awe, like it's a priceless historical artifact.
Eli pulls the Zippo lighter from his pocket. The engineer
picks it up, sparks the flint, watches the flame flicker.
This once grand theater have been largely gutted - seats torn
out, fixtures and fittings stripped, curtains ripped from the
stage. But still, there's a sense of grandeur to this place.
Looking out over the stage, a ROYAL BOX - once the most
prestigious seat in the house - has been converted into an
OFFICE of sorts. Seats removed and replaced by an ORNATE
MAHOGANY DESK facing inward, a CHANDELIER suspended above it.
The whole set-up is gaudy and ostentatious - the work of
someone who wants to project an aura of power and wealth, but
has no taste whatsoever.
A TALL MAN is seated in a battered leather armchair behind
the desk, deeply involved in an OLD PAPERBACK BOOK.
The book's cover is faded and partially torn away, the title
still just visible: 7 HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE.
The man is OLDER than most we've seen. His skin weathered by
the elements and by a long life's experience. One of the very
few people we've seen in this world close to Eli's age - and
unlike everyone else we've seen, he appears healthy and well-
groomed. A rich mane of hair, full set of teeth.
He wears a tattered SUIT AND TIE. None of it matches,
everything scavenged from different outfits and eras. But he
looks almost civilized. Respectable. His name is CARNEGIE.
He looks up from his book at the sound of a POLITE COUGH O.S.
REDRIDGE stands before him. Tall, powerfully built.
His accent is like caramel. A RICH, DEEP-SOUTH DRAWL.
Carnegie lowers his book. Concerned.
Carnegie stands. Thinking. This is bad news.
BEAT. Carnegie stares Redridge down. Nobody but nobody
questions his orders.
Carnegie sighs, rubs his brow. He knows Redridge is right.
A LARGE CROWD OF TOWNSFOLK - several hundred strong - has
assembled outside the Palladium theater. AN ARMED CREW OF
CARNEGIE'S GOONS keeps watch over the crowd.
Carnegie stands on a BALCONY above the theater marquee. He
treats the balcony like a pulpit, speaking through a
MICROPHONE connected to an old PA SYSTEM that carries his
words to the far reaches of the crowd.
The crowd listens intently, hanging on Carnegie's every word.
He is an incredibly charismatic and persuasive speaker - his
cultivated image and inspiring, confident delivery remind us
of a TELEVISION EVANGELIST.
This sends a MURMUR OF DISCONTENT through the crowd. Many
don't like where they suspect this may be going. Carnegie
senses this and dials up his rhetoric - delivering it now
with the fire-brand passion of an old-time baptist preacher.
The crowd is divided. Many return the "Hallelujah" with
varying levels of conviction. Others are not convinced. But
Carnegie continues unabated, selling it harder than ever.
Carnegie is such an impassioned and inspiring speaker it's
almost impossible not to get caught up and swept away by his
words. His apparently unshakable belief is infectious.
This sends a much broader ripple of discontent through the
crowd - this news has not been received well at all. Some
still "keep the faith" but many more are perturbed by this.
Carnegie motions for the crowd to settle down.
A DISCONTENTED VILLAGER steps forward, pushing through the
crowd and jabbing his finger angrily up at Carnegie.
Carnegie's goons quickly move in and efficiently SILENCE THE
MAN, removing him from the crowd. Dissent is not tolerated
here. Carnegie goes on speaking as if nothing had happened.
Carnegie steps back inside, leaving the crowd to talk among
themselves, clearly mixed about what they have heard.
As the assembled townsfolk disperse, FOUR MOTORCYCLES roar
into town and pull up outside the Palladium.
As the riders dismount, one detaches a CLOTH SATCHEL from his
bike's cargo rack. The four riders head inside. They each
have long, straggly hair and brutish expressions.
We recognize them now as the BIKER BANDITS who killed the
couple on the road under the freeway overpass.
Carnegie emerges into the second-floor hallway from the
balcony, mopping his brow. Exhausted and stressed from his
grand theatrical display, and from its mixed reception.
Redridge climbs the stairs to meet him.
Carnegie looks at his cracked old wristwatch.
That gets Carnegie's attention.
What was once a grand, gilded entrance foyer has, like the
rest of the theater, been largely gutted. But it's still
impressive - a spacious bar area with a grand staircase
leading up to a second floor, entrance to balcony seats, etc.
FADED OLD THEATER POSTERS still hang from the walls.
The place has been shabbily converted into a kind of SALOON.
Old ripped-out theater seats arranged around tables. A
FIREPLACE sputters dimly.
A MANGY TABBY CAT walks across the straw-laden floor. A dozen
or so CUSTOMERS in the place, a mixed, rough-looking bunch.
Redridge emerges from an upstairs room and nods to a group of
his MEN who are holding the bikers at the foot of the stairs.
Carnegie checks his reflection in a CRACKED HAND MIRROR,
licks his palm and slicks his hair back. He adjusts his tie
as Redridge's men usher the bikers into his "office".
Carnegie wheels around and flashes a smile at them. Just as
when he gave his balcony address, Carnegie is in performance
mode - charismatic and slick like a campaigning politician.
The bikers exchange looks. They understood maybe half the
words in that sentence. The lead biker - named HOG - speaks.
Hog tips the satchel's contents out onto Carnegie's desk.
BOOKS. About a dozen different volumes of all shapes and
sizes. Carnegie rifles excitedly through the collection.
We see various titles as he sorts through them. Treasure
Island. The Da Vinci Code. A volume of encyclopedia. The
Diary of Anne Frank. Tuesdays with Morrie.
In amongst the books are a few MAGAZINES. An old issue of
OPRAH magazine. A torn copy of SPORTS ILLUSTRATED...
...And a NEWSWEEK. The cover graphic illustrates OPPOSING
NUCLEAR ARSENALS over a world globe. On one side the STARS
AND STRIPES, on the other flags indicating a SINO-ISLAMIC
ALLIANCE. The headline reads: "IS THERE NO TURNING BACK?"
As Carnegie rejects each book with growing disappointment and
frustration, it's clear he's looking for a specific volume.
The bikers exchange more looks. An unspoken conversation.
Carnegie's guards bristle, ready for a confrontation.
Carnegie just smiles, always ready to smooth things over.
As always, his carefully stage-managed rhetoric is delivered
with the utmost conviction, every word dripping with passion
and persuasion. He's a master salesman, a true huckster.
He steps forward and looks Hog right in the eye. His gaze
like a laser beam, utterly disarming.
It's impossible not to be swayed by this guy. He's just so
full of fiery passion and infectious belief, you almost want
to reach into your pocket and hand over your wallet.
Hog snatches up his empty satchel.
He turns and marches to the door, the other bikers following.
The guards escort them out, only Redridge remains.
Carnegie slumps back into his chair, frustrated, pissed off.
Carnegie and Redridge lock eyes. BEAT.
Carnegie ignores him. Stands, walks toward the door. Redridge
sighs, gestures toward the books piled on Carnegie's desk.
Redridge stands by the marble fireplace, tossing the books
into the fire. The flames flicker and leap around the books
as their pages blacken and are consumed by the fire.
Eli watches as the engineer charges the battery with the gas
generator, which chugs noisily.
He licks his lips, dry as sand. Unscrews his canteen to take
a drink, but it's down to its last few drips.
Eli thinks a while longer. Then stands and stuffs his shotgun
inside his pack, shoulders his gear and makes for the door.
Eli stops in the doorway and turns back to the engineer.
And with that he turns and leaves. The engineer gulps. Not a
hint in Eli's voice that he didn't mean every word.
This old second-floor DRESSING ROOM has been converted into a
bedroom, simply furnished.
A WOMAN stands in front of an old DRESSING ROOM MIRROR, the
bulbs around the frame burned-out and broken. She washes her
face in murky water in an old PORCELAIN BOWL on the dresser.
Her name is CLAUDIA. Early 30s, pretty. She gazes into the
mirror as she dries her hands, but it's so cracked and warped
it's near impossible to see a reflection.
The door opens and Carnegie enters. He still looks steamed.
Claudia doesn't turn to look at him, keeps facing the mirror.
Carnegie says nothing. Just paces angrily up and down.
Finally Claudia turns to face him.
Carnegie trails off, the thought too awful to contemplate.
Claudia adopts a sympathetic expression, supportive.
This seems to anger Carnegie. He wheels on her.
She detects the aggressive tone in his voice and goes quiet,
head bowed. Carnegie moves toward her angrily.
He's in her face now. Claudia avoids eye contact, submissive.
He's shouting now, and she's trembling, afraid to speak.
Carnegie realizes he's frightened her. He softens.
He lifts her chin up, wipes away a tear.
He puts his hands on her lustfully. It's clear she's not in
the mood, but she halfheartedly responds anyway. More out of
a sense of wifely duty than reciprocated passion.
As they kiss, Carnegie pushes her excitedly against the wall
and feverishly begins unbuckling his pants.
The original customers have now been joined by the four
bikers, who sit at their own table drinking a clear and
pungent moonshine-type liquor from a shared jar.
Eli enters. All eyes are on him immediately, regarding him
with guarded interest as he pulls up a stool at the bar.
The BARTENDER approaches, looks him up and down. Suspicious.
Eli raises his hand as before. Holds it outstretched, steady.
Eli places the canteen on the bar.
Eli takes off his scarf and puts it on the bar. The bartender
takes it and looks it over. Not particularly impressed.
The bartender spies Eli's silver Saint Christopher pendant.
Eli stuffs the pendant inside his shirt. No way that's for
sale. Instead, he reaches into his coat and produces the fur
pelts he skinned from the dead cat, lays them out on the bar.
The bartender takes a pelt and examines it. The mangy cat
leaps up onto the bar and approaches. Sniffs at the pelts
with suspicion and HISSES at Eli.
Eli shoos the cat off the bar with a wave of his hand. At the
biker's table Hog watches this, not happy about this.
Satisfied with the pelts, the bartender gathers them up along
with the scarf, then turns away toward the back room.
A TEENAGE GIRL emerges from the back. No older than 16 or 17.
Dressed in unflattering work clothes, face grimy, blonde hair
tied back in a ponytail. But even through all this, it's
clear she is a strikingly beautiful young woman.
The bartender takes Eli's canteen and hands it to Solara
along with a RATION CARD he keeps around his neck.
Solara takes the canteen, pausing for a moment to look Eli up
and down. Unsure quite what to make of him, but intrigued.
There's something about him she can't put her finger on...
He doesn't look back at her. She turns and exits.
Solara exits via the Palladium's STAGE DOOR and walks across
the busy street to where TWO OF CARNEGIE'S ARMED MEN stand
guard around an ENCLOSURE OF CHAIN-LINK FENCE TOPPED WITH
RAZOR WIRE. TOWNSFOLK wait in line with bowls and buckets.
One of the guards recognizes Solara and lets her cut to the
front of the line. He punches two holes in her ration card
and lets her inside the chain-link enclosure.
Inside is an OLD RUSTED SPIGOT attached to a pipe emerging
from the earth. Solara cranks hard on the handle - it takes a
few pulls before the water comes, and then only at a weak
trickle; it will take a while to fill the canteen.
As Eli sits at the bar, a SHADOW comes into view and looms
large over him. Hog is standing behind him, glaring, cutting
a menacing figure in his armored cycle leathers.
Solara senses trouble brewing and moves off, taking Eli's
canteen away into the back room.
Eli doesn't turn. Just looks straight ahead. Impossible to
read him behind those mirrored goggles. Utterly inscrutable.
The bartender looks at Hog nervously.
Hog grabs him by the arm.
Blink. Suddenly Hog's head is pinned to the bar by nothing
more than Eli's thumb. Pressed deep into a nerve cluster in
his neck. Eli leans in close as Hog whimpers, paralyzed.
The other bikers stand and approach, the OTHER CUSTOMERS
following suit. Eli senses the trouble gathering behind him.
It's all Hog can do to just barely nod his head. Eli releases
his thumb. Hog staggers backward, gasping for breath.
Eli stands and makes toward the door, but the bikers and
other patrons have moved to block his exit.
Eli sighs, looks down at the floor. He's been pushed one time
too many today. For the first time, we see anger in his face.
The patrons look at Eli strangely. Who is this guy?
Eli reaches back and draws the samurai sword. Carves a line
in the dirt at his feet with the tip of the blade.
Carnegie has Claudia pinned against the wall, his pants
bunched around his ankles, ass bared as he pounds away at
her. Not making love. This is mechanical, loveless sex.
Claudia stares vacantly over his shoulder into space as
Carnegie thrusts into her again and again. Deeply
uninterested, just waiting for it to be over.
Suddenly, we hear a CRASH O.S. Carnegie stops and listens.
Claudia sees an opening to get out of this.
BEAT. Carnegie keeps listening. Then comes another CRASH.
He pulls up his pants, grabbing a RIFLE propped by the door
as he rushes out. Claudia just stands there for a moment,
then reaches down and pulls up her panties.
She moves from the wall and makes her way across the room,
feeling her way with her hands, gazing off into nothingness.
Only now do we finally realize that she is BLIND.
Carnegie emerges from the bedroom onto the balcony. Looks
down over the railing - and is stunned by what he sees.
CHAOS in the bar below. Eli cutting a one-man swath of mayhem
through the dozen brawlers. Most already lie dead. TWO MORE
MEN ATTACK Eli and are effortlessly felled by his sword.
Carnegie rushes hurriedly along the landing, banging loudly
on the doors of the upstairs rooms.
ON ELI. Surrounded by the dead, only one man left standing.
Hog. He backs away as Eli circles him like a predator. Sword
held ready, the blade glistening with dark red blood.
SOLARA re-emerges from the back room with Eli's refilled
canteen. She stops and emits a horrified GASP when she sees
the bloody carnage laid out in the bar before her.
She watches, mortified, as Eli moves toward the helpless,
terrified Hog, going in for the kill. Raising his sword...
Suddenly, Solara steps forward and CRIES OUT:
Eli FREEZES. Sword hanging in the air, poised to strike. He
turns his head to where Solara stands behind the bar.
BEAT as Eli considers. He looks back at Hog, still completely
at his mercy... and then LOWERS THE SWORD.
Hog stumbles backward through the door, into the sunlight.
Eli moves toward Solara, who stands petrified behind the bar.
Reaches out and gently pries the canteen from her loose grip.
In the exitway, Hog turns back inside, grabbing up a BROKEN
BOTTLE from the bloody floor as he goes.
Hog rushes Eli from behind. Solara sees him coming and goes
to SCREAM - but before any sound can come, Eli flips his
sword backward and Hog runs right onto it, SKEWERING HIMSELF.
BEAT. Hog just stands there for a moment, eyes wide, frozen
in shock. His fingers go limp, dropping the bottle.
He slides off the sword and collapses to the floor, dead.
Eli wipes the sword clean and sheathes it. Looks around at
the bloodied, fallen bodies. Then back at Solara.
As he turns and heads toward the door:
Accompanied by the sound of MULTIPLE GUNS COCKING.
Carnegie is on the landing, training his rifle down at Eli.
Alongside him, FIVE GUNMEN do the same. They've got him cold.
Carnegie sits at his desk, the huge auditorium and stage area
visible behind him. Eli stands before him. Around him are the
other gunmen, who keep their weapons trained on him.
Standing at Carnegie's side are REDRIDGE and CLAUDIA.
Carnegie's gunmen look him over, inspecting him warily.
Carnegie's confident gaze remains fixed on Eli throughout.
Eli can't help but react at the mention of that word.
Eli doesn't respond. Just stands there in Carnegie's gaze.
Barely noticeable, Carnegie gestures to one of the gunmen,
who nods in acknowledgement and leaves.
The mention of that word rankles Carnegie. He walks around
the desk toward Eli, waves an admonishing finger at him.
Carnegie can't help himself - once again he is in his natural
element, spinning the argument his way, pitching. Selling.
An impressive, impassioned performance. He sounds just like
an old-school TV evangelist. But Eli is unmoved.
Eli doesn't respond. Just stands there.
That's good. Good man. We educated
folk, we need to stick together, if
we're ever going to rebuild this
world. People like you and me,
we're the future.
What do you want with me?
Straight to the point. I like that.
Fact is, you could be in a lot of
trouble. This is a peaceful town.
You walk in here, armed, and the
next thing a dozen of my good
citizens are dead. I've hanged men
for less. I could hang you.
Or, you could come work for me.
What?
I never once saw anyone handle
themselves the way you did down
there in that bar. I don't know
where you learned it, but I sure as
hell could use it.
I'm not interested.
People who work for me can live
better than any walker ever
dreamed. Real beds, clean water,
hot food. Women, even. You could do
a lot worse, my friend.
I'm not your friend. And I'm not
staying. I got someplace I need to
be. Out west.
West? There is nothing west. It's
all gone, a long time ago.
I've been told different.
Eli doesn't reply. Carnegie smiles, dials up the charm.
The gunmen bristle, exchange nervous looks. Carnegie appears
unfazed. He smiles. BEAT. He looks to the gunman at the door.
The gunman opens the door. Eli turns and exits.
The engineer stands behind the counter, looking worried. His
heart sinks when he sees Eli enter.
Eli leans in a little closer. He smells a rat.
Eli looks at the engineer. Hard to be certain, but he's
pretty sure he's lying. Somebody got to him.
A VIOLENT COMMOTION is heard from down the hall. Suddenly one
of Carnegie's henchmen comes flying into view as he is THROWN
HARD INTO A WALL and slumps to the floor, unconscious.
Eli storms into the box, pissed. MORE GUARDS rush in behind
him. Carnegie, seated behind his desk, waves the guards off
as he stands to greet Eli, smiling ingratiatingly as ever.
Carnegie is a practiced liar. Much more difficult to read.
Redridge - one of the two men who chased Eli into the room -
steps forward. He regards Eli with a distrustful eye.
Redridge opens the door and ushers Eli inside.
It's another of the dressing rooms converted into a bedroom,
less well-appointed than Carnegie's own. A threadbare rug.
Bed with relatively clean sheets. A sink for washing.
Redridge smirks and closes the door, leaving Eli alone. Eli
paces across the room. Finally sits down on the creaky old
bed. Trying to figure out how he managed to get stuck here.
He unshoulders his pack, sets it down. Lies down on the bed.
It's been a while since he felt a real bed on his back.
A KNOCK at the door. Eli gets quickly to his feet.
The door opens and CLAUDIA enters. Carrying a metal tub of
water in both hands and, atop that, a dinner tray.
Eli just stands there. Totally unfamiliar with this kind of
situation, it's been too long. She smiles, embarrassed.
He takes the stuff from her, sets it on the table.
We get the impression that Claudia is as unfamiliar with this
kind of polite interaction as Eli. But she likes it.
She strikes a match and lights the oil lamp on the table. The
room is lit by its flickering glow.
As she turns for the door:
Claudia smiles. Neither has she.
BEAT. She trails off, struggling with this unhappy memory.
Eli gets it, raises a hand reassuringly.
There's a bittersweet quality to Claudia's words. As though
there is more to the story than she is telling.
Eli pulls out a chair at the table, offers it to her.
She smiles and sits. Eli sits across from her.
Again, bittersweet. The sense that Claudia feels trapped.
Thinking about it begins to upset her. She gets up.
Eli stands, escorts her to the door and opens it.
Eli closes the door, then sits back at the table.
Carnegie washes, looking at himself in the old dressing-room
mirror. He sees Claudia enter the room in its dim reflection.
A subtly accusing tone. It makes Claudia nervous.
Claudia moves to the bedside, begins to undress.
Claudia reacts suddenly to this. Shocked and angry.
Carnegie sighs, tiring of this.
Claudia looks at Carnegie in disgust.
Now it's Carnegie's turn to get angry. He rounds on her
menacingly. She backs off as he approaches.
He has her against the wall, his face just inches from hers.
Carnegie calms himself, backs off. Claudia goes to leave.
Carnegie surges forward and pins Claudia to the wall.
He releases his grip on her.
He speaks more softly now. As he strokes his hand tenderly
through Claudia's hair, a tear runs down her cheek.
Dark outside, but the room is brightly lit by the glow of the
oil lamp. Eli sits up on his bed, quietly reading the old
leather-bound book from his backpack.
Another KNOCK at the door. Eli jumps up and hurriedly hides
the book inside his shirt.
The door opens to reveal Solara. Looking very different than
she did before. Cleaned up and wearing a flowery summer
dress, blonde hair let down over her shoulders. Stunning.
Unlike everyone else we have met, she seems - physically, at
least - totally unscarred by the horrors of the times. Far
too beautiful a thing to belong in a world like this.
She glides into the room, closing the door. She's good. Very
seductive. Eli is totally disarmed in her presence.
She doesn't wait for an answer. Moves to the table and turns
down the oil lamp. A darker, more seductive lighting scheme.
She sits on the bed, kicks her legs playfully. Her light
cotton dress revealing in all the right places. The
silhouette of her body bathed in the seductive glow of the
oil lamp. No red-blooded man on earth could resist her.
She leans over on the bed, resting on her elbow. Her hair
cascades down. God damn, she looks good.
She slides off the bed, approaches him. Begins to work the
buttons of his shirt.
He moves her hand away. Gently pushes her back a step.
She is stunned. No man has ever turned her down before. And
then she seems a little insulted.
Eli opens the door for her.
Suddenly all her other emotions give way to fear. She moves
to the door and slams it shut again. Looks Eli in the eye.
She nods, fighting back a tear. This angers Eli.
He goes for the door handle, but she stops him.
BEAT. Eli moves his hand away from the door.
She looks up at Eli imploringly. Transformed. No longer the
teenage sex kitten. Now she's just a frightened little girl.
She smiles, wiping the tear from her cheek.
Eli and Solara sit together on the bed. A silent BEAT. At
first, it appears as though they have nothing to say.
She smiles. Eli is surprised to find himself smiling back.
Eli smiles, amused by the bluntness of the question.
Eli nods.
Eli thinks about this. Dredging through old, old memories.
Solara smiles like she's having her leg pulled.
BEAT. Eli thinks. Should he or shouldn't he?
Eli pulls the book from his shirt. Solara's eyes widen.
For the first time we see that it's a KING JAMES BIBLE. An
embossed GOLD CROSS on its old leather cover.
Eli opens it up, scans the page with his finger until he
finds the passage he's looking for.
ON SOLARA as she listens to Eli read. Transfixed.
BEAT as Eli thinks. How on earth to answer that?
She reaches out for the book but he snatches it away.
BEAT. Eli runs his fingers across the embossed gold cross on
the beat-up leather cover.
BEAT as Eli considers his answer.
BEAT. The two of them sit in silence for a moment.
She looks down, sad. She likes this guy. She doesn't want him
to leave. Eli can sense her sadness.
She walks over to where the dinner tray is covered by a small
cloth. She whips it away - to reveal ELI'S RAT nibbling on a
piece of cheese. Solara SHRIEKS and backs away.
The rat scurries down the table leg and leaps up onto Eli's
shoulder, just as afraid of her as she is of it.
Solara approaches warily. Reaches out and strokes him. The
rat scurries up her arm. She almost shrieks again.
Solara pets the rat on her shoulder. Then:
BEAT. Eli finds himself surprised that he admitted such a
thing. When is the last time he had someone he could call a
friend? He can't even remember.
She smiles. Giggles as the rat's whiskers tickle her ear.
Eli breaks the cheese in two and gives half to Solara. She's
about to eat but stops as Eli clasp his hands in prayer.
Unsure of what to do, Solara mimics Eli, putting her hands
together and bowing her head.
Solara looks at him, touched by that.
They sit and eat together, sharing the simple meal.
PULL OUT from the window as they eat, away from the theater.
Away from the town and its flickering points of torchlight.
Moving farther and farther away until the entire town is
consumed by the darkness of the world.
The pale sun rises over the town. To establish:
What was once the theater's COSTUME ROOM - OLD MANNEQUINS
still stand around in the corners, creating an eerie feel.
Carnegie and Claudia sit at a DINING TABLE, eating breakfast
in silence. A third place is set, but no-one is seated there.
Solara enters and sits down without a word.
Solara doesn't say anything.
Claudia appears perturbed by Carnegie's subtle probing.
Solara flashes him a frosty look.
Carnegie glares at her sternly.
Solara lowers her head, scorned. Carnegie continues eating.
Carnegie puts down his food, looks angrily at her.
He glances knowingly at Claudia.
She looks at the food on the plate before her. Then closes
her eyes and clasps her hands in prayer.
Claudia and Carnegie freeze. Carnegie stares at her, agape.
She snaps suddenly out of it, looks at her father.
She doesn't respond. Looks embarrassed.
Solara says nothing, just looks down at the table.
This piques Carnegie's interest greatly.
He barks the question at her. Solara is rattled.
Solara makes the SIGN OF A CRUCIFIX with her index fingers.
Carnegie's eyes widen; he can barely believe it.
Carnegie BOLTS SUDDENLY FROM THE TABLE, overturning his chair
and sending his plate of food crashing to the floor.
Carnegie races across the landing, toward the ARMED GUARD
posted outside Eli's bedroom. The guard steps aside as
Carnegie flings the door open and barges inside.
Empty. No sign of Eli or his gear anywhere. The window is
WIDE OPEN, the curtains fluttering gently in the breeze.
His hands shaking, the engineer disconnects Eli's battery
from the generator and places it on the counter.
Eli stands on the other side of the counter with his SHOTGUN
TRAINED RIGHT AT THE MAN'S HEAD. He takes the battery from
him and stuffs it into his backpack.
Carnegie races from the lobby entrance and looks up at the
open window to Eli's room. He could have easily jumped.
Redridge emerges onto the street behind him.
They turn to face the engineer's storefront - just as ELI
EMERGES ONTO THE STREET, shotgun still in his hand.
EVERYBODY FREEZES. Like a wild west stand-off. Redridge's
fingers play over the butt of the pistol on his hip.
BEAT as time hangs perfectly still for a second... and then
Redridge draws and FIRES, SHATTERING A PARKING METER just
inches from Eli and showering quarters all over the sidewalk.
Eli rushes along the sidewalk, RETURNING FIRE. The shot wings
Redridge in the shoulder. He goes down, wounded.
Carnegie dives for cover as FOUR MORE GUNMEN rush from the
theater. Carnegie waves frantically in Eli's direction.
They spot Eli sprinting away and rush off in pursuit.
Carnegie gets to his feet and storms back inside the theater.
Solara and Claudia watch through the window. Turn suddenly
when they hear the door slam open behind them.
Carnegie stands in the doorway, glaring at them.
LOCAL RESIDENTS scream and rush to and fro in panic as Eli
darts along the boardwalk.
CARNEGIE'S GUNMEN pursue, firing their rifles wildly on the
run. The bullets splinter wood, pierce barrels and crates,
narrowly missing Eli as he dashes, keeping his head down.
Eli aims the shotgun and FIRES without even looking. The shot
HITS A GUNMAN SQUARE IN THE CHEST, dropping him to the dirt.
Eli hits the deck, diving for cover behind a JUNKPILE as more
gunfire ricochets all around him. He takes a moment to
collect himself, reloads the shotgun.
The three remaining gunmen close in on the junkpile warily.
Eli signs a cross over himself with the shotgun, looks to the
sky and offers up a silent prayer. Then emerges from around
the junkpile back into the street. All three gunmen OPEN
FIRE, their bullets whipping past on either side of him.
In one swift motion Eli raises the shotgun and FIRES. Three
shots in quick succession. And then there is silence. Smoke
wisps from the shotgun's sawn-off barrel.
The three gunmen LIE DEAD IN THE STREET. One hit square in
the chest. The other two each have maybe one half of their
heads remaining.
Eli looks around. He's right at the end of the main road, the
perimeter where the town meets the open desert. He's free.
And then, A GIRL'S SCREAM. Distant but unmistakable.
Eli whips around. In the upstairs window of the theater,
Carnegie shoves Solara roughly against the wall. Barking
angrily at her, shaking her.
Eli looks at the road. Then up at the theater. Then back to
the road again.
But he sounds less resolute now than before. Until today this
was always a simple decision for him to make. But now...
He marches back toward the theater, stepping over the fallen
bodies of the gunmen, re-loading his shotgun as he goes.
Redridge finally manages to clamber back up to his feet,
wincing as he clutches his painful shoulder wound.
He looks up just in time to see Eli coming right at him.
Without breaking stride, he COLD-COCKS Redridge in the jaw
with the shotgun, sending him back to the deck, out cold.
Eli kicks the door wide open, finds Carnegie holding Solara
against the wall. She sobs, terrified. Eli levels the shotgun
at Carnegie's head.
He holsters the shotgun. Then in the same fluid motion draws
a PISTOL from his belt that we never even knew he had.
Carnegie releases his grip on Solara, steps away, hands up.
BEAT. Eli glances at Solara.
Carnegie takes a small step forward. Suddenly, his whole
demeanor changes, and he now looks at Eli imploringly.
Carnegie takes a step closer. He appears entirely sincere -
but then he is very good at doing so.
BEAT. Eli seems to be considering what he's heard carefully.
Carnegie smiles broadly... and then with a sudden blur of
movement Eli PISTOL-WHIPS him to the floor.
He turns to Solara and offers her his hand.
Eli emerges from the theater, leading Solara onto the street.
RESIDENTS part before them, staring at Eli with astonishment.
Eli passes the statue of Carnegie - and STOPS. Something
about that thing is bothering him.
He turns, drawing his samurai sword and in the same fluid
motion SLICING across the base of the statue.
BEAT. And then the STATUE TOPPLES from the neat cut just
below the knees, CRASHING DOWN to the ground and SHATTERING.
The assembled residents GASP at this defiant display.
Eli sheathes his sword and takes Solara by the hand again.
CRANE UP over the main street as they both head out of town.
The town barely visible on the distant horizon behind Eli and
Solara. Eli walks as he always has, his pace steady and slow.
Still, Solara lags along behind. She's already tired.
She stops in the road.
Eli doesn't stop walking. Solara is forced to catch up.
Solara is incredibly hurt by this. Blinks back a tear.
BEAT. Eli stops and turns back to face her.
Eli sighs. He's not getting through to her. So now comes the
harsh truth of it:
Solara steps closer, her eyes pleading.
A long BEAT as Eli considers this. For a moment it appears as
though Solara might have won him over. But then:
He turns and walks off, leaving her in the road. She stands
there, furious, screaming at his back as he walks away.
He doesn't turn or acknowledge her at all. Just keeps walking
off into the horizon. Getting smaller all the time.
Solara stands there in the road, weeping. All alone.
She turns and walks back in the direction she came.
A small, penned-in area to the rear of the Palladium
containing an eclectic bunch of farmyard animals. Goats,
sheep, geese, pigs. Mostly mangy, sad-looking specimens.
Carnegie stands in the yard, tossing handfuls of animal feed
from a nearby sack onto the ground. He watches with
satisfaction as the animals gather at his feet to feed.
Claudia emerges from the theater with an ice-pack.
Carnegie applies it to his jaw, red and swollen from Eli's
pistol-whip. Redridge appears nearby, his arm in a sling.
Carnegie doesn't appear to be listening. He is lost in a
world of his own as he tends to the farm animals.
Carnegie finally looks up from his animals, at Redridge.
BEAT as Carnegie considers this.
He turns back to his animals, summoning up old memories.
He snaps out of his reverie and looks at Redridge.
As usual, Carnegie's slick rhetoric has worked - Redridge has
totally bought into it. Claudia, however, looks appalled.
He reaches out and takes Claudia by the hand.
She smiles halfheartedly, but it's clear she is mortified.
Carnegie turns back to Redridge.
Redridge nods and goes to leave.
BEAT. In all this excitement about the book, she had been
completely forgotten about.
Redridge turns and leaves. Claudia scowls at Carnegie, but he
doesn't even notice, just goes back to feeding his animals.
Solara wanders the road. She's tired. The sun beats down
mercilessly. Nothing but desolation and wasteland all around.
She comes to a FORK IN THE ROAD. Stops at the junction,
unsure. Was this here before? She doesn't remember.
There are no signs. Both paths look the same. Which one is
which? She turns and looks back, looks around. She's lost.
She alternates her finger between the two paths. Eeny-meeny-
miney-moe. Picks a path and follows it, headed down the road.
Eli walks on. Slow and steady. His gaze, as ever, fixed
firmly on the horizon. Takes a swig from his canteen.
Suddenly, he STOPS and stands stock still in the center of
the road. Impossible to know what he's thinking.
He stands there for a long time.
Solara comes upon an abandoned CHEVRON STATION. She doesn't
remember passing this. Looks back up and down the road.
There's a RUSTED CAR parked at one of the pumps. Like every
other car we've seen, stripped of its tires and engine.
She walks around to the driver's side. A PETRIFIED FEMALE
BODY lies on the ground, half-in, half-out of the car.
Solara claps her hand to her mouth and recoils, horrified.
In the dead woman's hand is a dusty bottle of MINERAL WATER.
Solara hesitates. Not wanting to get closer. But so thirsty.
She braces herself, grimacing, and tries to take the bottle,
but the dead woman's hand is closed tight around it. She
pulls harder and wrenches it free. In the process she falls
on her butt and flips the corpse over onto its back.
In the other woman's arm, she has a SKELETAL BABY cradled to
her bosom. It seems to be staring right at Solara.
Solara SCREAMS and frantically shuffles backward away from
it. Gets to her feet and runs across the forecourt.
She stops by the station shop and rests against the wall,
hyperventilating, heart pounding. Trying to get it together.
She inspects the water in the bottle. It looks clean.
Unscrews the cap with shaking hands and takes a sip.
She SPITS IT BACK OUT, coughing. It's rank. Undrinkable.
Solara enters. Gloomy inside. Comprehensively looted. Empty
shelves coated in thick sheets of dust.
She moves further in, searching for something, anything. But
the place has been gutted. There's nothing. She checks the
wall of dead refrigerators. Shattered glass, all empty.
She's never known desolation and emptiness like this. It's
beginning to scare her. She wheels around in a panic.
Distant, calling from outside. Solara hears it and freezes.
She runs out across the forecourt, onto the road.
A FEMALE FIGURE is hunched by the side of the road about
fifty yards up ahead. Hard to see what she's doing from here.
Solara starts walking toward her.
The woman has her back to Solara. She's on her knees,
muttering to herself. Gathering objects up from the road.
As Solara moves closer, we see that the woman is struggling
with an UPTURNED SHOPPING CART. Stuck in a roadside ditch,
its contents spilled out next to a few BRACKEN BUSHES.
We see her face now. It's the SAME YOUNG WOMAN from before.
The same shopping cart. The same trap.
The woman looks around, sees Solara standing nearby. She's
shocked to see that it's a girl.
The woman seems anxious to get rid of her. Tries to indicate
the threat silently with her eyes, but Solara doesn't get it.
She steps into the ditch and starts to haul the cart out.
Too late. THREE ROAD BRIGANDS POUNCE FROM THE BUSHES. Every
bit as brutish and horrifying as the group that Eli killed on
the road in our opening. They grab Solara and drag her from
the road into the desert, screaming and kicking all the way.
The BRIGAND LEADER looks Solara up and down lustfully.
Solara is reviled by the man. He's filthy, his stench
overpowering. One eye missing, just a dark, empty socket. He
licks his lips, revealing a mouth almost devoid of teeth.
The brigand leader lashes out and grabs her by the throat.
He releases her. She slumps to the dirt, whimpering.
He looks back to the struggling Solara.
She says nothing, just sobs helplessly.
He unbuckles his pants, lets them drop to his ankles.
We hear a sound. It's hard to place. Something like a THHUP.
The brigand leader is frozen in shock. His face goes pale,
the blood draining from it. The two bandits holding Solara
look at their leader in dismay. Staring down at his crotch.
A quiet whimper escapes from his lips as he looks down.
There is an ARROW IMBEDDED IN HIS CROTCH. What was once down
there is now just a bloody mess of mangled meat. More blood
streams down his thighs. A real horror show.
He staggers backward, shrieking. Hands shaking. Staring down
at the awful wound from which the long arrow shaft extends.
The two other brigands release Solara and whip around,
scanning the horizon. They see nothing. One of them has a
RIFLE. He unslings it and aims it frantically around.
Then they both see it. Coming right at them. The most
terrifying thing either has ever seen.
ELI, WALKING TOWARD THEM FROM THE ROAD, OUT OF THE SUN. His
silhouette distorted in the rippling heat. An avenging angel.
He pulls another arrow and draws it back as the rifle bandit
trains his weapon on him, finger tightening on the trigger.
Eli SHOOTS. The arrow sails through the air and RIGHT INTO
THE RIFLE BARREL. The feathers at the end of the shaft
plugging the muzzle tight.
Rifle bandit pulls the trigger. The gun EXPLODES, BLOWING HIS
HANDS CLEAN OFF. He falls to the ground, screaming.
Eli only had two arrows. He shoulders the bow and draws his
sword. All the remaining brigand has is a small knife. The
two now square off at arm's length. A hopeless mismatch.
BEAT. The knife brigand hesitates, trembling. And then RUSHES
ELI WITH THE KNIFE. Eli deftly sidesteps, flourishes the
sword. So quick it almost seems like he didn't move at all.
The knife bandit staggers forward a couple more steps. His
hand goes limp and drops the knife.
And then his HEAD FALLS BACKWARD like a Pez dispenser. Almost
completely decapitated, but not quite. Blood fountains from
the neck stump as his body falls to the dirt.
Eli moves to the other two bandits who lay horribly wounded
on the ground, but still breathing. He stands over their
fallen bodies. They stare back up at him, helpless.
He crouches down between them in the dust.
The brigand leader defiantly spits blood at him.
Eli sighs. Stands and looks down on him without pity.
He plunges his sword into the bandit leader, finishing him
off. Pulls the arrow from his crotch and wipes it clean.
He turns to the other man, raising his sword.
Eli pauses, sword hovering over him, poised to strike.
Eli crouches once more by his side.
The bandit follows along with Eli, mouthing the words
quietly. The life ebbing from him with each moment.
His eyes roll back as his final breath leaves him. Dead. Eli
signs a cross over his body, then stands and walks away.
Solara sits on the ground nearby, a wreck. Eli approaches and
gathers her up in his arms. She clings on to him tightly.
She laughs, a tear rolling down her cheek. Grips him tighter.
He helps her up and escorts her back to the road.
She looks back at the young woman still slumped in the dirt.
They walk on down the road.
METAL GARAGE DOORS roll back to reveal darkness within.
A PAIR OF HEADLIGHTS fires up. Full beam right at us.
A VEHICLE roars out of the darkness onto the street. Heavily
modified with plate armor and turret-mounted weapons. But its
original form still recognizable underneath.
It's a HONDA ODYSSEY minivan. Once the #1 choice of soccer
moms, transformed now into an armored personnel carrier.
Another minivan roars from the garage behind it. A DODGE
GRAND CARAVAN, similarly customized and armed to the teeth.
THREE MORE CARS follow. As eclectic an assortment as you
could imagine. A MINI COOPER. FORD EXPLORER. A PRIUS. Each
adorned with plate armor and weapons.
In the lead Minivan is REDRIDGE, heavily armed. He nods to
the DRIVER, who guns the engine.
The fleet of armored vehicles moves out, kicking up a great
funnel of dust in their wake as they roar out of town.
Late afternoon. The sun hangs low on the horizon. We're far
from the road. Nothing but scrub brush and a few PRAIRIE DOG
BURROWS dotted around.
A PRAIRIE DOG pops its head up, scans the horizon. Sniffing
the air, whiskers twitching... and is SKEWERED BY AN ARROW.
Thirty yards away, one of the pieces of scrub brush appears
to COME ALIVE. And then we realize it is Eli's GHILLIE SUIT,
camouflaging both he and Solara beneath it.
Eli casts off the camouflage net and walks toward the dead
prairie dog. Solara just stands there, appalled.
Eli picks up the dead animal by the scruff.
He yanks out the bloody arrow. Solara looks away.
When she turns back, Eli is standing right there, holding the
dead animal in front of her face. She YELPS in surprise and
staggers backward, falling on her butt.
Eli and Solara sit in the mouth of a desert cave, around a
flickering campfire. The prairie dog roasts on a spit.
Eli digs his knife into the carcass, the blade comes out
clean. It's done. He clasps his hands together and gazes down
penitently at the ground.
Eli carves off a piece of meat. Juicy and succulent. He bites
into it, teasing Solara by making a show of how good it
tastes. He feeds a piece to the rat perched on his shoulder.
Solara tries to appear uninterested, but she's starved.
He takes another bite, thinks on this as he chews.
She tries to fight the temptation to try it... but she can't.
She reaches out and tears off a piece. Sniffs at it, takes a
small bite... then quickly wolfs down the rest. Eli smiles.
As she eats, she gestures toward Eli's Saint Christopher.
Eli reaches up and touches his hand to it.
Eli smiles and shakes his head.
Solara listens, rapt. Eli is a good storyteller.
Solara looks at Eli tenderly, with admiration.
Eli looks away, down at the ground. He appears sad.
BEAT. No words, just the flickering firelight.
The fire down to its last embers. Eli sleeps next to his
pack, half-hidden in the looming shadows of the cave. His hat
and goggles hung up for the night on the hilt of his sword.
Solara sleeps nearby... then opens her eyes. Not asleep after
all. She looks over at Eli - his face hidden in shadow and so
impossible to tell if he's asleep or awake.
No response. Quietly, she moves forward, kneeling by his
side. She opens his coat and checks the pockets. Empty.
She goes deeper, peeling back the layers of clothing,
stealthily frisking him. She finds something on his lapel,
hidden under several layers, that causes her to stop.
It's a RECTANGULAR PLASTIC BADGE. The red, white and blue
colors faded and worn. It reads:
She stares at it for a moment, not knowing what to make of
it. Then moves on, continuing to pat him down.
Whatever she's looking for is not here. She turns her
attention to the backpack. Slowly, carefully, opens it up.
There it is. THE BIBLE, wrapped carefully in its neat little
package of cloth and twine. She reaches in for it.
Suddenly, ELI'S HAND SHOOTS OUT AND GRABS HER BY THE WRIST.
She cries out, startled. Eli sits up, his face just a dark
shape in the shadows. For the first time he appears a little
scary to Solara.
He's very forceful. She nods, a little afraid of him.
He grips her wrist tighter.
Eli releases her wrist. Takes the pack from her and closes it
up. Pulls it closer to him and lies back down.
She lies back down beside him, but doesn't close her eyes.
She just lies there, watching him.
The sun rises out of the east. And out of the sun comes the
FLEET OF ARMORED VEHICLES. Racing side-by-side down the road.
The lead vehicle comes to a halt. A door opens and Redridge
gets out. MORE ARMED MEN emerge from the other vehicles and
follow him as he marches into the wasteland by the roadside.
The DEAD BRIGANDS are splayed out in the dirt where Eli slew
them. A FLOCK OF BUZZARDS is picking their bones clean.
Redridge looks at the footprints in the dirt headed from the
bodies and back onto the road. Two sets of tracks.
He moves back to the cars.
The other men hold for a moment, still looking at the half-
eaten bodies in the dirt. Redridge turns back.
Hesitantly, they make their way back to the vehicles. The
cars gun their engines and move on down the road, past the
abandoned Chevron station. Dust pluming in their wake.
Eli and Solara walk together, passing by a few burned-out
buildings. It appears we might be headed toward a town.
Solara looks up at the sweltering sun. Then around at her
surroundings. Nothing but devastation and decay.
Eli wheels around and jabs a scolding finger at her.
Solara is surprised by the severity of his reaction.
Eli resumes walking.
BEAT as Eli thinks on how to explain it.
Solara thinks about this, shakes her head.
They walk on.
On the outskirts of a small town that lies in ruins. Almost
every building burned or reduced to rubble.
Except for one SMALL HOUSE. The building is damaged and worn
but in mostly decent condition. It stands out among its
surroundings for being the only structure still intact.
The windows are BARRED. The outer structure fortified with
SHEET METAL and other custom patch-ups. The whole plot
surrounded by a CHAIN-LINK FENCE TOPPED WITH RAZOR WIRE.
Eli and Solara crouch behind a pile of rubble nearby.
BEAT as Eli considers. Then stands and unhooks his shotgun.
They approach the house cautiously. Arrive at the perimeter
fence. There's a gate held in place by a PADLOCK.
Eli pulls a pair of BOLT-CUTTERS from his belt and snips the
padlock free. Swings open the gate with a metallic SQUEAK.
They move inside, up the garden path. Though the soil in the
yard is dead, it's been carefully raked and tended. WEEDS
arranged in thoughtful patterns, like real flowers.
Eli steps forward, his foot planting on a CRACKED PAVING
STONE that shifts almost imperceptibly under his feet.
Accompanied by a barely audible SOUND. He looks down.
A ROPE NOOSE suddenly whips around their feet, tightening at
their ankles and YANKING THEM UPSIDE-DOWN INTO THE AIR. Eli
drops his shotgun to the ground.
They hang there for a moment, twisting in the breeze.
The front door to the house SWINGS OPEN to reveal...
AN ELDERLY COUPLE. The woman's gray hair tied into a neat
bun. The man bald, squinting through wire-frame glasses. They
look like the couple from Grant Wood's "American Gothic."
Instead of a pitchfork the man holds a 12-GAUGE RIOT SHOTGUN
which he keeps trained from the hip on Eli and Solara.
They step outside, regarding their new visitors carefully.
The man seems more suspicious than his wife. He drags Eli's
shotgun toward him with his foot, hands it to his wife.
This seems to annoy the man.
Clearly he's proud of the work he's done with the pitiful
means at his disposal.
The wife steps forward, she's much warmer, less guarded.
The woman glares at him. The husband reluctantly accedes and
moves to the concealed trap apparatus. Releases the rope,
dropping Eli and Solara to the ground in a heap.
The old woman helps them to their feet. They shake off the
noose from their ankles.
Eli and Solara exchange a look. What the hell is this?
It's like something out of the world before. The interior is
almost perfectly preserved. Chintzy couches. A mahogany
table. A TV set in the corner. Lace curtains. Unreal.
Eli and Solara sit on the couch, feeling self-conscious and
looking entirely out of place in this cozy environment.
George sits across from them on the couch, scowling at them
inhospitably. The shotgun resting across his lap.
Martha emerges from the kitchen, carrying a tray laden with a
tea pot and old china cups. Cracked and faded, but intact.
She places the tray on the coffee table and sits.
She lifts the tea port and pours into the cups. But it's not
tea, only water. Somewhat murky water. Eli and Solara stare
at the cups, unsure. Martha gestures toward them.
They raise their cups and take a sip. Martha watches eagerly.
It's clearly a thrill for her to be doing something as
civilized and elegant as serving "tea" to guests.
Martha smiles, delighted. She lifts her own cup to her lips.
HER HANDS TREMBLE, the cup rattling against the saucer.
George just grunts. Not interested in conversation.
He stands and moves toward the back door. Opens it up and
beckons Eli and Solara to come look.
Eli and Solara stand in the doorway, looking out on the yard.
Solara is horrified by what she sees.
The entire back yard is a GRAVEYARD. Maybe twenty human
graves dug shallow into the earth. Some were dug long ago,
others look like they're very recent.
George and Martha go back inside, leaving Eli and Solara
gazing at the little graveyard.
Solara is stunned.
Eli and Solara re-enter. Solara looks at George nervously.
He's still carrying that shotgun.
Martha's voice drifts in from the nearby KITCHEN.
An unnerving glint in his eye. Eli moves toward the door.
As he gets to the door, George moves to intercept. Hard to
tell if he's blocking his path or moving to open the door for
him. A tense BEAT.
Martha emerges from the kitchen.
Eli stares George down. Reluctantly, George steps aside. Eli
opens the door and escorts Solara outside.
Eli and Solara emerge into the sunlight. Walk down the garden
path. And FREEZE IN THEIR TRACKS.
THE ARMED VEHICLES ARE COMING. Driving toward them out of the
horizon in a hazy cloud of dust.
Eli bundles Solara back into the house. George stands in the
doorway, squinting at the approaching convoy.
George follows them back in, furious.
Martha rushes to the window, pulls aside the lace curtain.
Outside she sees the armored vehicles SCREECHING TO A HALT.
The men spill out from the vehicles and take cover behind
them, locking and loading weapons.
She rushes across the room, teeth gritted with determination.
She goes to the couch and yanks off the seat cushions.
Underneath is a WOODEN LID which she throws open to reveal:
A HUGE CACHE OF WEAPONS. Automatic rifles. Shotguns. Pistols.
Grenades. And enough ammunition for everything.
She pulls out an M-60 MACHINE-GUN, slings the strap over her
shoulder and locks in a CHAIN OF BULLETS. She looks like a
post-apocalyptic Martha Stewart.
George pulls out an AK-47, slots in a magazine.
He offers a .44 MAGNUM to Solara.
George sighs, turns instead to Eli.
Eli is already reloading his shotgun, checking the barrel.
Readying the weapon in the practiced manner of an expert.
Redridge steps forward, raises a BULLHORN.
SILENCE. No sign of activity inside the house.
Redridge turns back to his men. Their hands trembling. They
didn't sign up for this, and they're not ready for it.
Redridge turns back to the house. Into the bullhorn:
Eli is crouched beneath the window. George and Martha have
taken up positions at other windows, peering out.
BEAT as Eli thinks.
Redridge waits. Still no sign of a response. His nervous
gunmen exchange worried looks.
Redridge raises his hand to silence him. Looks up as an
UPSTAIRS WINDOW slides open.
A CLOTH PACKAGE is tossed from the window. It lands in the
dirt outside the perimeter fence a few yards from Redridge.
Cautiously, he approaches. The package is wrapped in cloth
and tied up with twine. It looks like Eli's bible.
He picks it up and tugs at the twine, untying it. Folds away
the cloth wrapping. Looks for a moment in puzzlement at the
object, at the words written on the front of it.
It's a MINIATURE CLAYMORE MINE. The small red light on top of
the unit ILLUMINATES WITH A BEEP. Armed.
He drops the package in the dirt and races for his life back
toward the vehicles.
He dives across the trunk of the Explorer into cover as THE
MINE EXPLODES, SHATTERING EVERY WINDOW OF EVERY VEHICLE. The
lightweight Mini Cooper takes the main brunt and EXPLODES,
cartwheeling through the air, a burning wreck.
Redridge looks around. Three men lie dead already. Flaming
wreckage all around him. Suddenly, it's a war zone.
MACHINE-GUN FIRE ERUPTS FROM THE HOUSE, peppering the
vehicles' armor. The gunmen cower behind cover.
Redridge aims at the house and OPENS FIRE. Inspired by his
example, the others follow. A HAIL OF BULLETS CRISS-CROSS
BACK AND FORTH. The house's faded paint facade is shredded.
Martha continues firing wildly with the M-60. Screaming at
the top of her lungs, loving every minute of it.
George and Eli also open fire from their windows,
periodically ducking to take cover from incoming fire.
Solara sits across the room, in the corner, sobbing.
MORE GUNFIRE splinters the window frame above his head.
She nods.
Eli peeks out and FIRES OUT THE WINDOW, dropping one of the
enemy gunmen with a crack shot. Ducks back down as the return
fire impacts around him.
Amidst all the chaos and gunfire, George has been listening
to this exchange.
BEAT. George chambers a round and RESUMES FIRING.
Redridge's men continue the hail of gunfire. Six of them dead
now, six more still standing. No lessening of fire from
inside the house. They're losing.
Redridge races between the vehicles, ducking from gunfire
until he makes it to the back of the Dodge Caravan. Pops the
trunk and pulls out a ROCKET-PROPELLED GRENADE LAUNCHER.
He sets it on his shoulder, rests on the trunk to steady his
aim. And FIRES. The rocket screams toward its target, tearing
through the chain fence and TEARING AN ENTIRE CORNER FROM THE
HOUSE in a fiery explosion.
Filled with smoke. The sounds of COUGHING.
Dazed, George pushes his way through the smoke, waving his
arms to clear it. A BLOODY GASH on his forehead.
He finds her lying on the tile floor in what remains of the
kitchen. Or at least her top half. The rest of her is gone.
George slumps to his knees with tear-filled eyes. Takes his
wife tenderly by the hand for a moment.
Then the anger returns. He gets up and turns, consumed now by
a wild fury. Firing with rage over the torn brick wall. He
CLIPS ANOTHER GUNMAN IN THE HEAD, killing him.
George moves back toward the LIVING ROOM, firing as he goes.
Redridge moves between the cars again, staying behind cover.
George's hail of gunfire has them pinned down.
Redridge jumps into the driver's seat of the minivan, turns
the key in the ignition. Jams the accelerator down with the
butt of his rifle, then shifts the transmission into DRIVE.
The gunmen leap clear as the minivan HURTLES TOWARD THE
HOUSE, engine roaring. CRASHES THROUGH THE CHAIN FENCE.
Eli looks up from cover and see the van coming RIGHT AT HIM.
He dives clear as the van CRASHES THROUGH THE WALL INTO THE
LIVING ROOM. It SMASHES INTO THE FAR WALL, finally coming to
a stop.
More dust and debris, more coughing. Eli tries to get up, but
winces in pain. Puts his hand to his side, it comes back WET
WITH BLOOD. A bad wound. He covers it with his coat, stands
and moves through the smoke.
He finds her in the smoke. She embraces him.
As the smoke clears, Solara sees George PINNED AGAINST THE
WALL BY THE MINIVAN. His body crushed. Dead.
As he helps her to her feet, we hear the sound of MOVEMENT
They turn around. The gunmen are ENTERING THE HOUSE, passing
through the smoking hole left by the minivan.
Eli reaches for his sword. Met by the sound of MULTIPLE GUNS
COCKING. Redridge steps out from among the gunmen. Smiles.
Eli and Solara are shoved out of the house at gunpoint and
marched past the torn perimeter fence to the vehicles.
Eli has been stripped of his weapons and backpack. Redridge
faces him and points a pistol at his head.
BEAT. Eli doesn't answer. Redridge cocks the pistol.
Redridge stares him down. Eli just stares right back. Totally
unflappable. Redridge motions to his men.
The gunman carrying Eli's pack opens it up and tips its
contents out onto the ground. The ghillie suit, battery, some
old canned goods, other odds and ends. No sign of the book.
Redridge holsters his gun and frisks Eli, going through his
pockets. Finds nothing. He opens Eli's coat and checks the
inside pockets. Digs around deep inside.
And then suddenly he SHRIEKS IN PAIN. Yanks his hand out to
reveal ELI'S RAT, TEETH SUNK DEEP INTO HIS FLESH.
Redridge flails around violently, trying to get the rat off
him, but it won't let go. His hand is bleeding badly.
He finally manages to shake it free. It hits the floor dazed.
Redridge STOMPS ON IT with his boot, reducing it to a bloody
smear in the dirt. Eli lowers his head in sadness.
Redridge clutches his bloody hand, glares at Eli furiously.
Pulls his gun again and marches right up to him, pressing the
muzzle tight against his forehead.
His finger tightens on the trigger.
She breaks from the gunmen holding her and rushes toward
Redridge. Reaches inside her dress and PRODUCES THE BIBLE.
Satisfied, Redridge takes the book. Runs his hand over the
leather cover, gazes admiringly at the gold-embossed cross.
Solara looks at Eli guiltily. She feels terrible.
Solara stands between him and Eli. Deadly serious now.
Solara glares at Redridge. He sighs. He can tell she means
it. It's not worth the aggravation. He turns back to Eli.
Eli gathers up his stuff into his pack. Shoulders it and goes
to pick up his sword, but Redridge puts his boot on it.
Eli still has a half-dozen guns trained on him. He turns and
walks away, toward the road. As he passes Solara:
A tear runs down Solara's cheek as she watches him walk away.
Redridge grabs her by the arm and pulls her toward the
vehicles as his men load up and prepare to move out.
Solara sits in the back seat, staring out the rear window as
it drives down the road at the tail end of the convoy.
She watches as Eli moves away down the road, getting smaller
and smaller until he is just a speck on the horizon.
She bursts into floods of uncontrollable tears.
Solara in the back seat, calmer now. The tears dried on her
cheeks. She sits staring blankly at the DRIVER in front.
And then she LUNGES VIOLENTLY FORWARD. Clawing and biting at
the driver, who struggles to fight her off. His hands come
off the wheel and the car FISHTAILS WILDLY.
The DRIVER sees something odd in the rear-view mirror.
Redridge turns to see the car behind VEERING ERRATICALLY then
SLAMMING ON THE BRAKES, stopping in the middle of the road.
The car screeches to a halt. Redridge watches through the
rear window as the driver's side door opens and the driver is
The door closes again, the engine revs and the car TURNS
AROUND, racing back down the road in the direction it came.
BEAT. Redridge knows he's right.
The car moves on, following the rest of the convoy.
Solara screeches the car to a halt outside the smoking
wreckage of the besieged house. She runs from the vehicle to
where ELI'S SWORD lies in the dirt and grabs it up.
Solara races down the road in the car, pedal to the metal.
Eventually, she sees him. At first just a dot on the horizon.
But unmistakably Eli. By now, she'd know him anywhere.
Suddenly the engine SPLUTTERS. She checks the fuel gauge; the
needle deep in the red. She pounds the wheel in frustration.
The car grinds to a halt, dead. She flings open the door and
leaps out of the vehicle, rushing after Eli on foot.
ON ELI. As always, his pace steady and slow. The sun directly
ahead of him as it sets on the horizon. Headed always west.
Solara is running up behind him, a hundred yards back.
He doesn't stop or look back. Just keeps on walking.
She finally catches up with him, breathing hard, exhausted.
She continues walking alongside him. Trying to process this.
This kind of compassion is totally foreign to her.
She holds out the sword, offering it to Eli by way of
atonement.
Eli seems appreciative that she would think to return it to
him. He takes it and slings it over his shoulder.
They walk on together, into the sunset.
Eli and Solara follow the road through burned-out towns and
retail neighborhoods. Gutted and dead, like every place else.
But something is different here. Things are greener. Tufts of
grass here and there. They attract Solara's attention.
Eli reaches down and runs his hand through the grass.
They keep walking. Eli groans, clutches his side. Does his
best to hide his pain from Solara. She notices anyway.
They walk on through the night. Eli stops and sniffs the air.
They keep on along the road. A shallow uphill incline. They
follow it uphill, finally reaching its crest, where they stop
and take in the view before them.
THE PACIFIC OCEAN. Straddled by the GOLDEN GATE BRIDGE - the
once-great structure has partially collapsed from decades of
neglect and disrepair. The span sags and hangs low over the
ocean, the asphalt cracked and ruptured.
On the other side of the bay, SAN FRANCISCO - or the little
that remains of it. The city has been almost TOTALLY
DESTROYED - entire areas reduced to rubble, the few buildings
still standing looking on the verge of collapse.
Solara looks at it all in horrified awe. Eli, unperturbed,
keeps on moving, still clutching his side.
Eli and Solara make their way south across the bridge, side-
stepping the fractures in the road.
Eli leads Solara through the rubble of what used to be San
Francisco. It's like walking through the wreckage of 9/11's
Ground Zero, but a hundred times the scale. Horrifying.
They pass by the wreckage of a HOTEL, nothing but the lobby
still standing. A HILTON sign protruding from the rubble.
Eli uses his sheathed sword as a walking stick, poking around
ahead of him for loose rubble underfoot. He steps carefully.
More buildings are still standing here, but they're nothing
more than great dead monoliths. Solara looks up at the
blasted skyscrapers - she's never seen anything like it.
The buildings loom over her like giant tombstones. It scares
her - like walking through the graveyard of a dead world.
They keep walking, passing the TOPPLED TRANSAMERICA PYRAMID.
Once a bustling oceanside tourist spot, now a ghost town.
Eli and Solara walk along the litter-strewn street, passing
the old RIPLEY'S BELIEVE-IT-OR-NOT and WAX MUSEUMS. The
celebrity mannequins are still in fair condition, but slumped
at their feet are CHARRED HUMAN SKELETONS.
Eli is struggling now. He looks pale from the blood loss. His
breathing labored. Solara takes him by the arm to help him.
A dead, ruined place, like everywhere else. We hear the sound
of SEAGULLS nearby - the only sign of life at all.
Eli and Solara walk along the pier, until they reach its end.
The original end has long since collapsed into the sea, but a
RICKETY HAND-MADE ROPE BRIDGE has been affixed to the pier's
sheared-off edge.
Eli and Solara stand at the pier's end, looking out to sea.
Reveal now that the rope-bridge leads out across the bay to:
Looking much the same as it always has, old and dilapidated.
The coastal fog shrouding it gives it an ethereal look. It
feels almost like a mythic place - the "promised land" Eli
has sought for so many years.
A tattered STARS AND STRIPES still flutters in the breeze
atop the prison lighthouse.
Eli and Solara make their way carefully across the bridge. It
feels highly unstable and sags low over the bay, the waters
below close enough to lap around their ankles.
Eli and Solara arrive at the prison gates. Securely locked.
As they inspect it for a possible way to enter:
They look up. A GUARD in paramilitary fatigues is stationed
in one of the perimeter towers. Training a rifle on them.
In the opposite tower ANOTHER GUARD has his rifle trained on
them too. Eli looks up, raises his hands.
Keeping the gun trained on them, the tower guard uses his
free hand to talk into a WALKIE-TALKIE RADIO. We don't hear
the conversation. All Eli and Solara can do is wait.
The guard puts away his radio and shouts back down:
BEAT. And then the massive front gates SLOWLY OPEN ON
MECHANICAL RUNNERS with the low groan of rusted iron.
Eli and Solara look at each other, then step gingerly inside.
As soon as they step inside they are SURROUNDED BY DOZENS OF
HEAVILY-ARMED SOLDIERS. Not U.S. military, more like a semi-
official militia. But every bit as deadly.
Eli and Solara raise their hands. A pair of SOLDIERS take
Eli's pack and sword, pat them both down for other weapons.
The soldiers before them part - to reveal a THIN, BALDING MAN
wearing spectacles. He wears Kevlar body armor over his tweed
jacket and tie. Professorial, academic.
He approaches, shakes Eli's hand vigorously - very excited.
He turns back to Eli.
Solara looks at Eli, puzzled. Lombardi finds it hard to
contain his excitement.
He leads them across the courtyard into the prison buildings.
Redridge's remaining vehicles drive back into town and come
to a halt outside the theater. Redridge emerges from his car,
carrying the bible. Walks up to the Palladium and enters.
What was once a cell block is now an IMMENSE LIBRARY. Stacked
floor to ceiling with books. Lombardi shows Eli and Solara
around. Behind them, a pair of ARMED GUARDS follow closely.
Solara is stunned as she surveys the endless stacks of books.
She's never seen anything like it.
Lombardi raises a quizzical eyebrow.
BEAT. Lombardi appears sad for a moment.
Lombardi looks at Eli with anticipation. So does Solara,
interested to know where this is going to go next.
Eli winces in pain, puts his hand to his side.
Redridge appears. Carnegie looks at him eagerly.
Redridge holds the bible up proudly. Carnegie beams.
Redridge hands it over. Carnegie sits back in his chair,
running his hand lovingly over the battered leather cover.
He opens the book and looks inside.
BEAT. And then he looks up at Redridge, confused.
Eli, Solara and Lombardi sit at one of the long lunch-room
tables. The two armed guards keep watch nearby.
He pulls a pen from his pocket, motions to one of the guards.
The guard nods and moves toward the door. As he does so:
Carnegie looks at the open bible, jaw hanging loose, his
complexion ashen. Like he's just been slapped in the face.
The guard brings a THICK SHEAF OF WRITING PAPER to the
cafeteria table, sets it down by Lombardi.
Eli removes his goggles. Solara can't believe what she sees.
His eyes are pale, milky-white, dead. TOTALLY BLIND.
Lombardi hurriedly writes down every word.
Carnegie sits at his desk, still in shock. Eli's bible sits
open on the desk before him.
Claudia is ushered in by a guard.
He rushes forward and thrusts the bible into her hands.
As Carnegie hunts on his desk for a paper and pen, Claudia
opens the book and trails her fingertips across the raised
lettering.
For a moment there is a glimmer of recognition... a faint
smile... but then it fades as Carnegie turns back to her,
eagerly clutching the writing materials.
Carnegie is aghast. BEAT as the anger swells within him,
threatening to explode...
He swipes violently at the bible, knocking it out of
Claudia's hands. He grabs it up and tries to rip it in two,
but it's too thick to tear. Red-faced with rage, he tosses it
out over the box balcony. It lands somewhere in the dark
auditorium below, between the rows of gutted theater seats.
As he paces angrily back past Claudia:
He slumps in his chair, exhausted and furious. Claudia sadly
turns and leaves him alone with his thoughts.
Some considerable time later. Great stacks of paper have been
filled with Lombardi's handwriting.
Lombardi's pen races across the paper, struggling to keep up
with Eli's recitation.
Solara is curled up on a nearby bench, asleep. Eli's coat
covering her to keep her warm.
Eli clutches his wound painfully as he continues to recite.
He looks paler now than ever. Close to death.
The prison yard shrouded in the dim light just before dawn.
Solara crosses the yard. She looks more mature somehow.
Determined and strong. She carries with her ELI'S SWORD - and
something else, tucked under her arm.
She stops in a nondescript corner of the yard.
At her feet is a SHALLOW MOUND OF DIRT. At the head of the
mound, a SIMPLE TOMBSTONE.
She kneels and places a SINGLE FLOWER on the grave.
Lit only by the pale moonlight, barely enough to see by.
Carnegie sleeps soundly in bed. Next to him lies Claudia,
wide awake. She checks that Carnegie is sound asleep, careful
not to wake him before she creeps out of bed and exits.
Claudia is on her hands and knees in the darkness, searching
blindly in the aisles and beneath the theater seats.
She finds Eli's bible in some litter strewn on the floor.
Sitting in the darkness, Claudia opens the book and runs her
fingers across the braille, reading. And though we can barely
see in the dim light, we see the smile on her face. The joy.
As Solara kneels by the grave, we see now that she wears
Eli's SAINT CHRISTOPHER PENDANT around her neck.
The tombstone reads:
She unsheathes Eli's sword, plants it in the ground before
his grave. Takes the BOOK from under her arm and opens it up.
It's a NEW BIBLE. Crudely typeset from Lombardi's original
transcription and printed on the prison press.
She opens it up and begins to read a passage from the bible
over Eli's grave. We don't hear what she says.
As Solara finishes her reading and closes the bible, LOMBARDI
appears behind her.
She stands, pulling Eli's sword from the earth.
BEAT. Solara looks at the sword, her fingers playing across
its hilt. The blade glimmers in the light of the rising sun.
There is a determined, purposeful look in her eye.
The sun rises through the fog on the horizon.
The great iron gates grind open. Solara emerges from inside
the prison, steps out onto the island rock.
She is dressed in a flak jacket, combat pants and boots.
Eli's old pack across her back. Hair tied in a neat pony
tail. Atop that, Eli's ragged fur hat.
In her hand she clutches a copy of the newly-printed bible.
Eli's sword slung over her shoulder.
MONTAGE as Solara walks back along Fisherman's Wharf...
through the San Francisco rubble... across the Golden Gate
bridge...
...and finally back onto a desolate road leading off into the
desert wasteland. She looks up and down the road, then turns
and heads toward the sun on the horizon. Headed east.
As she walks away into the sun, her lonely silhouette on the
road reminds us of Eli as we saw him so many times before.
She grows smaller and smaller as she walks into the distance,
until she consumed by the rising sun and we

A black screen.
The sound of a knife cutting through boot leather.
Fade in on the waists of two men (THE SURGEONS) hovering
around a crude operating table.
In the extreme background, TWO STRETCHER BEARERS are just
leaving.
One of the bearers stops and looks back. His face is numb.
And he nods hollowly.
We cannot see the patient stretched out on the table. But we
do see that the first surgeon has succeeded in getting the
man's boot off.
As the TWO SURGEONS duck through a tent flap in the background
we see a mangled foot, torn by shrapnel, it oozes blood from
a cut clear to the bone.
LIEUTENANT JOHN J. DUNBAR'S eyes are now open. He's a young
man, his features sharp and handsome. With effort, he lifts
his head and searches the room.
His eyes come to rest on the form of a legless man lying in
bloodsoaked sheets. He's whimpering like a child.
Dunbar comes to a sitting position on the operating table.
As his eyes move around the room they come to rest on a crate
filled with the boots of men who have lost their legs.
A cane travels through space and deftly hooks one of the
boots.
Lieutenant Dunbar brings the boot onto the operating table.
He tries to pull it on his mangled foot, but the pain makes
him cry out. Deliberately he breaks the cane and sticks a
piece of it between his teeth.
Tears of pain are rolling down his face. A sweat has broken
out on his forehead and with great determination he pulls
the boot on.
The two weary surgeons sip on steaming mugs of coffee, their
white coats spattered with blood. Their brief respite is
interrupted by the sound of a muffled scream.
Together they turn and rush back into the tent.
The operating table is empty save the broken cane and a small
pool of blood. Dunbar is gone.
In a natural valley below is a peaceful field. And on either
side of the field, seperated by a hundred yards of green,
are low rock walls.
Several dairy cows are lying dead in the field.
A group of MOUNTED UNION OFFICERS, ride onto the crest of
the hill and look down at the field. The distinguished man
with a long grey beard is GENERAL TIDE.
Ragged CONFEDERATE SOLDIERS crouch sullenly behind one of
the walls.
And just behind the other wall are UNION MEN, better equipped
perhaps, but just as weary as their enemies.
We hold on one man, an enlisted soldier, SERGEANT PEPPER. He
chances to glance behind and squints at a strange sight.
A solitary officer is standing a few feet behind him. The
sun is at his back, giving him a ghostly feel. Eerily he
takes a step or two forward. He's limping badly.
The sergeant recognizes him. It's Dunbar.
Dunbar says nothing. He just stands and stares. It unnerves
the sergeant.
The sergeant stares at Dunbar's foot.
A ping of riflefire flies overhead and the sergeant dives
for the wall. He calls over his shoulder.
Dunbar settles next to the sergeant.
The sergeant nods at the distant hill and Dunbar looks too.
Now he nods toward the trees behind them and the lieutenant
follows. Several union men are clustered around a huge hunk
of material attached to a gondola.
More riflefire comes in and some of the union men answer
with a few rounds of their own. The sergeant watches the
confederate line across the field through a crack in the
wall.
Lieutenant Dunbar is not watching the enemy. He's looking at
some horses picketed in the trees behind the union lines.
There's a nice bay. There's a big roan.
Dunbar is still watching the horses. He's holding on a small,
well-muscled buckskin standing a little apart from the others.
Now he moves away from the wall, heading for the horses.
The sergeant squeezes off a shot. Squinting across the field,
he sees a rifle with a hat on the tip of its bayonet waving
at him disrespectfully. The sergeant rolls on his side to
reload. He keeps on talking to the lieutenant, but the
lieutenant is gone.
The sergeant's chatter is interrupted by a sound... the sound
of hoofbeats rushing in behind him. Men on either side are
scattering, but there's no time for the sergeant. He turns
to the sound and cringes against the wall as the buckskinned
belly of a horse soars over his head.
Dunbar and his horse hit the ground with a thud and dig for
the confederate line.
Some of the confederate riflemen can see the wild rider headed
for their lines. A sharpshooter (RAY) calls over his shoulder.
A man in a slouch hat crowned by a jaunty feather looks up
from an impromptu meeting. TUCKER.
Like the others, General Tide is absorbed with the spectacle
of a single horseman riding into the teeth of the enemy. He
holds out his hand and an AIDE slips a pocket telescope into
his palm. The general sights through his telescope.
Tide lowers the telescope, glances at the aide and peers
back down at the field.
Dunbar can see the confederate riflemen now. They're rising
up behind the wall to aim and fire.
Fifty yards from the enemy line he's still unhit. He wheels
the buckskin into a sharp left turn and they streak parallel
to the confederate flank. The buckskin is charging hard, his
heels throwing out clumps of dirt.
The firing is tremendous. The lieutenant's hat is torn away.
A slug lifts off one of the officer's epaulettes, but still
no bullet finds him.
The entire union line is standing, strangely quiet in their
disbelief.
The lieutenant passes the last of the riflemen and pulls the
buckskin up at the far end of the field. The little horse is
pitching and rearing, ready for another run.
The lieutenant bows his head in exhaustion, but a sound coming
across the field brings his head up quickly. A great cheer
is rolling along the union line.
General Tide is furiously spurring his horse as he tears
down the hill. His aides are trying desperately to keep up.
There's action along the confederate line. The men Dunbar
passed are desperately trying to reload. Those at the end
are jeering, taunting the lieutenant to take another pass.
Tucker is moving along the line. The battle ground has
suddenly taken on a festival atmosphere and Tucker doesn't
like it.
Dunbar gazes down along his leg. Blood is pumping from his
wound.
Again he digs his heels into the buckskin's flanks and they
fly down the line. The confederates are trying to reload. A
few are able to get off a hasty shot, but they're all too
late.
Dunbar swerves in a little closer to the wall as he approaches
the other half of the confederate ranks. They're standing
ready, like a firing squad.
Tucker has just reached the side of Ray the sharpshooter.
The lieutenant shuts; his eyes, lets the reins flop on the
buckskin's neck and spreads his arms as they thunder toward
the line of riflemen.
Ray's finger squeezes the trigger, his keen eye sights down
the barrel of his gun. THUD... a rifle ball buries itself in
Ray's forehead.
The union trooper who fired the fatal shot gets up from a
kneeling position and scrambles after some of his comrades.
With his aides coming behind, General Tide leaps his horse
over the wall at a dead run.
The entire Union line pours after him, screaming a thunderous
battlecry in unison. Pepper is one of the last to scurry
over the wall.
The union troops have the rebels in full flight, chasing
them into the woods beyond the field.
Suddenly the field is quiet. There is rifle fire in the
distance but otherwise everything is still. The field is
almost empty. The three dead dairy cows are still there. And
at one end of the field is a solitary buckskin horse. His
rider lies on the ground, a foot hooked in one stirrup.
The sound of men's voices is coming near. Suddenly, General
Tide is peering down at him. Dunbar stares back, glassy eyed.
General Tide stares down into Dunbar's blank face. He kneels
next to the lieutenant and bends to whisper in his ear.
The general looks up at one of his aides.
The aide dashes off to do what he's told, as General Tide
gently removes Dunbar's foot from the stirrup and lays it
carefully on the ground. The image fades out.
The image of a boot fades in, pull back to see that a lone
rider is coming toward us. He has had a long and dusty trip.
It's Lieutenant Dunbar. He's still riding the little buckskin.
Dunbar pulls up short. He stares thoughtfully at something
in the distance.
Dunbar starts forward and the camera swings around to cover
his back. In the distance we can see an isolated and dreary
military post.
The sky is very blue. The sun is bright. A rough-hewn,
unfenced fort is straight ahead.
There are several miscellaneous stone structures, a well-
stocked stable, barracks, officer's quarters and in the center
of it all, a headquarters building.
Lieutenant Dunbar, riding straight and tall on his powerfully
built buckskin, Cisco, passes into view. He's headed for the
center of the fort.
Silhouetted against the outside, Lieutenant Dunbar pauses in
the wide doorway of headquarters. We can hear the distant
sounds of work and life coming from the outside but in here
it's strangely quiet.
A SERGEANT sits at a desk in the foyer. Across the way, at
another desk, is an enlisted CLERK. Both men glance from
their paperwork at the man in the doorway. But it's only a
glance and they go right on shuffling paper.
Footfalls sound in a hallway and a blue-eyed officer with
slick, black hair swings into the foyer. He too has a
slackness that echoes the dreariness of this post.
The blue-eyed officer, LIEUTENANT ELGIN, and Dunbar meet at
the doorway. Dunbar glances down at a scrap of paper in his
hand.
Being roughly the same age and rank these two might idle
awhile, but Dunbar is eager. He's already moving.
Dunbar stops and turns, peering down the hallway. No one is
there.
Sitting behind the desk, holding a set of orders is MAJOR
Lt. Dunbar is standing in front of the desk.
He arches an eyebrow, challenging the lieutenant. He has sad
swollen eyes. He is an army lifer passed over too many times
for promotion and right now does not look like a well man.
Fambrough returns to the order. Dunbar watches him in silence.
The major's tunic is covered with food stains. Sweat has
broken out all over his head. His grooming is awful. His
hands are trembling slightly. Something is very wrong with
him.
Now the major sees something on the official paper. He looks
quickly at the lieutenant, then back at the paper, moving
his lips but making no sound.
The major fixes Dunbar with a sly look.
Still sly, Fambrough digs into a side drawer. There is the
distinct clink of glass on glass as he rummages. Now Fambrough
has what he wants, a blank official form. He begins to fill
it out, writing in a disturbingly childish way.
He looks over his work with a schoolboy's excitement and
affixes his signature with a wild flourish.
He folds the order and hands it to Dunbar.
The major turns in his chair to stare through a single, dusty
window. He can see a teamster outside, tying down canvas on
a heavily-loaded wagon.
Dunbar stands and salutes. Fambrough returns it snappily.
The lieutenant starts for the door.
Dunbar turns around. Fambrough is standing in front of his
desk. There's a large, dark splotch on the major's trouser
front.
He jams both of his hands into the front of his pants and
giggles.
Lieutenant Dunbar skips down the steps, picks up Cisco's
reins and starts leading the buckskin along the front of the
building. He looks briefly at his orders, stops and turns
back towards Fambrough's office.
And there is Fambrough with a full glass of booze in hand,
toasting the young lieutenant from the window. A wide grin
on his face.
A wagon is pulling slowly away from the lonely headquarters.
The insane face of Major Fambrough peeks around the corner
of a building. On his head is a ridiculous, plumed hat.
Now he looks both ways, as if preparing to cross a busy
street. Seeing that the coast is clear, he minces into the
parade ground in front of headquarters. The plume is waving
in the breeze and the major carries something in each hand...
an officer's sword and a revolver.
Except for these items, the unfortunate major is naked.
As he trots onto the parade ground, Fambrough is startled to
find that Elgin is following him. He begins to run faster.
Fambrough halts near the center of the parade ground and
turns back on the lieutenant and waves his pistol menacingly.
Now Elgin sees a GRIZZLED SERGEANT approaching Fambrough
from the opposite direction.
Fambrough turns on the voice behind him and waves his pistol
at the sergeant.
But Fambrough finds himself staring at the barrel of the
sergeant's raised pistol.
In a panic Fambrough wheels back on Lieutenant Elgin.
Slowly and kindly, Elgin is walking toward him. He holds out
his hand.
But the lieutenant keeps his hand held out. Fambrough eyes
him silently. Then he screws up his face like a crybaby.
In one swift motion, Fambrough brings the revolver up,
swallows the barrel and pulls the trigger.
At the sound of a single shot behind him, Dunbar twists around
on the wagon seat. Seeing nothing, he turns back to face the
front and takes stock of the driver, TIMMONS. He doesn't
like what he sees... or smells.
Timmons, is not what would be called a credit to his race.
If all teamsters were greaseballs he would be their absolute
ruler. His stink must be incredible. He leans over the side
of the wagon and hocks out a disgusting stream of spittle.
Afternoon shadows are slanting across the rolling ocean of
prairie. The wagon passes camera, headed towards an endless
expanse of prairie.
The sky is filled with stars. One suddenly catches fire and
shoots across the heavens.
Dunbar sits at the fire watching the star burn out.
Timmons is bending over the fire. He farts, then turns to
Dunbar with a smile "good one, huh?".
He spits for good measure and for Dunbar, the moment is
broken, but not forgotten.
Looking over his shoulder at the journal, we see that this
latest entry is one of many and Dunbar is embellishing it
with a drawing of a star.
Dunbar is off the seat riding atop the mountain of supplies.
He is writing in his journal.
Dunbar stops his writing.
Timmons slows the wagon and stops. He has seen something.
A cluster of bones bleached white, are lying in the tall
grass. Human bones. Dunbar is squatting next to them. Timmons'
head dips into view over his shoulder and the teamster's
mouth splits into a toothless grin.
The teamster spits and starts for the wagon. Dunbar comes to
his feet and examines the burnt out remains of a wagon. Then,
he finds an arrow in the grassy wheel. Looking off he can
only guess at the drama here. The sun is sinking fast below
the great expanse of prairie.
A hatless soldier in a tattered overcoat, CAPTAIN CARGILL,
is on the bluff staring morosely through his telescope. One
hand rubs a sore spot on his jaw. He sticks the telescope in
his overcoat pocket. He wedges a hand into his mouth and
wiggles a loose tooth. He gives it a tug but it is not ready
to come out.
The breeze is coming up and Captain Cargill pulls his overcoat
closed. As he slips his last button through the hole, it
breaks off, bounces off of his foot and rolls a few feet
down the bluff.
Captain Cargill watches the button forlornly, making no move
to go after it. He raises his head once more and looks to
the east. Nothing is out there.
Cargill is walking along the base of the cut bank. He stops,
staring up at a series of holes dug into the bluff. Their
entrance covered with "found" draperies of all description.
He works up the courage to call out.
At last there's some real movement behind one of the holes
and CORPORAL GUEST crawls through one of the curtains. He
neither salutes nor speaks. He blinks down at Cargill, looking
more like a hobo than a soldier.
The "MEN" have lined up in front of Cargill's sad, sod hut;
pitiful men. Sick, moth-eaten, crushed in spirit. There are
nine of them. Just behind Cargill is a half-collapsed supply
house and a broken down corral holding two bony horses.
Cargill has a brave face and a broken heart.
The zombie troops have already broken ranks, lurching back
to their holes and gear like a gang of drunks.
Cargill walks out of frame to reveal the broken down sign
that hangs askew above his quarters: "Fort Sedgewick."
A solitary WOLF trots along the top of a bluff overlooking
the river. He has two white socks running up his front legs.
An old jagged scar cuts across his muzzle. He's watching the
ruins of Fort Sedgewick.
The little band of troops, all on foot, with their two lame
horses trailing behind are fading in the distance.
The wagon is parked in a shallow depression, its team
unhitched. Under the wagon the forms of two men lay curled
up in blankets.
Dunbar is sleeping peacefully, his nose pressed against a
jacket. Now his nostrils begin to twitch. His face turns
sour and he wakes to find that he's been sleeping against
the stink of Timmons. Flies buzz about the teamster's sleeping
body.
Dunbar quickly pulls away from the bad smell. He rolls out
from under the wagon and clambers to his feet.
Lieutenant Dunbar looks out over the prairie. It's going to
be a spectacular day.
In the far distance, a column of buzzards is circling. Dunbar
has paused to watch them. He ducks back under the wagon.
No response from the deep-sleeping driver. Dunbar starts to
move closer to shake him awake but the odor under there makes
him think twice. He snatches up the arrow and probes under
the wagon.
The teamster comes awake with a squeal, he joins Dunbar
staring up at the circling birds.
Timmons' mood is different now. He begins to hitch the team
with a new sense of urgency.
From a high point on the prairie we can see the wagon moving
west. And no more than half a mile away we can see Cargill's
column, moving east. Neither is aware of the other's presence.
Several buzzards are settling on a half-butchered horse.
It's one of the animals that was with Cargill's command. We
can hear men singing. The shaky little column from Fort
Sedgewick is marching east for Fort Hays.
Dunbar is walking through a little valley of tall, rich grass.
The wagon is nowhere in sight.
He looks back at Cisco who is also wandering by himself
searching for prime shoots.
Timmons' wagon comes into view now.
Timmons, as usual, laughs at his own imagined wit.
The wagon disappears over a ridge and again, Dunbar is alone.
In gentle awe, he runs his palm over the top of the grass
swirling about his waist.
A meadow lark's mournful call startles him. Dunbar brings
his head up at the sound and so does Cisco.
Now there's a sudden lifting of the breeze. It sweeps through
the valley, making the grass roll with a life of its own.
The lark's sad call and the sudden violent movement of the
wind sends a shudder through Lieutenant Dunbar. He scans the
horizon in all directions, aware all at once of his aloneness.
He flips the reins over Cisco's neck and sticks a foot in
the stirrup.
Dunbar heads for the ridge.
As Dunbar comes over the hill, he sees the wagon has ground
to a stop.
The wagon has paused at the edge of a bluff. Dunbar and
Timmons are peering into the little valley below
The wagon lurches over the edge of the bluff and down. We
see the pathetic remains of Fort Sedgewick.
A full view of the deserted fort. Timmons sits on the wagon
by himself.
Dunbar appears from Cargill's former quarters.
The lieutenant looks briefly at Timmons, and marches over to
the caved-in supply house. Again he ducks inside.
Dunbar emerges from the supply house and stares up at the
wagon driver.
Dunbar moves around to the back of the wagon.
The lieutenant's eyes have gone absolutely black. The heel
of his hand is dropping lightly on the butt of a long revolver
at his hip.
Timmons leaps down.
The half-caved in supply house bulges with supplies.
Cargill's late quarters are also filled with new goods.
There's barely enough room to reach the little bunk.
Timmons is atop his wagon seat, reins in hand.
Timmons clucks to his team and the wagon pulls out. The light
on the prairie is fading fast.
The wolf with two socks is patrolling along the edge of the
river.
A lamp turns up, casting a glow over Dunbar's incredibly
cramped quarters.
He adjusts the lamp and sits back on the bunk, his journal
on his lap. He begins an entry.
Dunbar signs the entry, yawns contentedly and reaches to
turn down the lamp.
A wolf howls somewhere outside. It's low at first but it
keeps on building. At its height, the howl sounds as though
it is coming from, something gigantic.
Dunbar is still listening after it's gone. He hears wood
snap in the direction of the river then all is quiet again.
Without hesitating, he slips the big revolver out of its
holster and cradling it like a teddy bear, slips it under
his blanket.
The light is left blazing.
First light over the sad fort.
Dunbar is sleeping quietly. He opens his eyes and rears his
head to get his bearings. Then he flops back down and shuts
his eyes, hoping for more sleep.
He hears two heavy footfalls in rapid succession.
Dunbar holds his breath staring at the doorway. Quietly, he
pulls his gun aiming it directly at the doorway.
Silence. Suddenly, a shadow starts across the threshold,
followed quickly by Cisco's big buckskin head. The horse
watches Dunbar a moment, then looks curiously around the
room.
Dressed in pants, old boots, and a threadbare shirt, Dunbar
bangs home a nail on the sagging corral gate. He tests the
gate's swing and satisfied with this, he latches it leaving
Cisco inside.
The lieutenant picks up a water bucket and we follow as he
walks the few, quick yards it takes to reach the bank
overlooking the river.
When he sees what lies along the slope below, he stops. At
this spot just below the fort, a garbage dump falls away to
the stream. Old containers, sacks, rags, trash, bottles, and
a thousand other miscellaneous scraps.
Dunbar hops over the steep lip of the bank and starts down
the gentle incline, eyeing the trash as he goes. Now he
reaches the stream and kneels, preparing to dip the bucket.
He sniffs a bad odor, looks across the stagnant stream and
sees something sticking out of the water.
It's a cloven hoof. And further out, another. And part of an
antler. There are decomposed antelope corpses everywhere.
An antelope skeleton is being pulled from the muck.
Dunbar is stripped to the waist as he drags the body through
deep water. Covering his face against the stink is a bandana.
His pants are soaked and he's sweating hard.
At the stream's edge he heaves the antelope onto a pile
holding several others. Under the bodies is a huge bed of
trash which he has already collected.
The body he tosses up slips and he has to right it. Now he
wades back into the river and searches the water with his
hands for more.
Dunbar fastens the last of the traces to a pile of garbage
spread out on a sheet of canvas. He picks up a set of long
reins, clucks to Cisco and they start up the steep bank with
the load.
A distinct change has taken place with the water. It's
running.
Oil is pouring out of a jug and onto the great heap. Dunbar
empties the last of the oil and throws the empty jug onto
the pile. He takes the match he's been holding between his
teeth and flicks it to life with a fingernail. He flips it
onto the heap.
The fire catches immediately and Dunbar has to back away a
few steps as the flames send a column of thick, black smoke
into the air.
To Dunbar's horror, the smoke billows bigger and bigger...
climbing into the sky as a signal for anyone to see.
He stoops for his rifle and we follow as he scrambles up the
slope. The lieutenant clambers over the lip and stops to
scan the horizon.
But we continue, following the black smoke as it towers higher
and higher until it is just a wisp.
Four fantastic faces fill the screen, three together, one a
little apart. They are tired, frustrated faces, and also
very fierce. They are painted. Several wear their hair in
spiked roaches, one has brightly-colored eagle feathers
jutting out of his scalp at all angles. The FOUR WARRIORS
are naked from the waist up.
They are Pawnee, the scariest of all the Plains Tribes. The
man a little apart looks THE TOUGHEST. The four men are
squatting on their haunches and four scrawny ponies stand
behind them. All the men are staring in the same direction
from a low rise on the prairie.
It's smoke, a column much smaller than Dunbar's. The smoke
is drifting up from the furthest of a line of rolling gullies.
We can see the whole Indian party now: the four men and their
ponies, two injured men on travois and two extra ponies.
The Toughest turns back to face the others. Without another
word, he jumps on his horse. Another silence as the three
warriors consider what to do.
The Toughest has listened all the while, growing more and
more disgusted. He pulls the blanket from his shoulders and
flings it angrily at his companions.
He starts his pony walking down the rise toward the smoke.
The Third Pawnee starts after the Toughest. The other two
follow.
We're dropping down through the smoke, right down to the
supper fire of Timmons the teamster. He's cooking slab bacon
in a pan. Risking the heat, he dips a finger into the pan
and sucks off the grease.
There's a sudden swish of sound behind him and a split-second
later, an arrow goes deep into the wagon driver's ass knocking
him clear across the fire.
Timmons screams like a half-butchered hog and starts into an
odd crippled run. He clears the gully where he's been camped
and struggles up the incline.
Another swish and another scream, as another arrow catches
him high on the shoulder.
Terrified with pain and fear, Timmons looks back as he
scrambles up the slope.
Here comes the Toughest at a lazy gallop. He's riding only
with his legs. His hands are busy with bow and arrows. Casual
but blink quick, the Toughest snatches another arrow from
the quiver at his waist, strings it and fires. This arrow
catches Timmons in the gut. He falls squirming against the
slope.
The Toughest is still coming, his face like granite as he
fires arrow after arrow.
The three warriors who came with the Toughest have reached
the wagon. Two of them are slicing away harness on the team
of nice army horses. The third is rifling through Timmons'
gear. This man unwittingly picks up Timmons' blanket. When
he gets a whiff of its stink, the warrior flings it far out
on the grass. Then he drops to one knee, scoops up some dirt
and rubs it between his soiled hands.
A lone arrow remains in Timmons' dead body, jutting out of
his privates.
Now the Pawnee warriors pass by, heading for home in no
particular hurry. The Toughest passes by with Timmons' scalp
hanging from his bow. None of the men give Timmons a parting
glance.
We're close on Dunbar, his face is grimy with sweat and dirt.
He's working hard at something.
We pull back and see that Dunbar is half-way up the bluff,
he's been filling up the pockmarks, the holes where Cargill's
men once lived.
Exhausted, he stabs the shovel into the fresh earth and pauses
to look over his work, all of the holes have been filled.
His eyes sweep over the prairie across the river. He sees
something moving, it's the wolf. Dunbar instinctively goes
for his rifle.
Before he can bring it up to aim, he has second thoughts. He
lowers the gun and watches the wolf a moment longer, then
walks up the hill and disappears into the sky.
Fingers are playing with a button. It appears to be the same
one that came off Captain Cargill's coat. Dunbar stands atop
the hill, sighting across the prairie.
He sticks a hand in his overcoat, pulls out a piece of dried
meat and bites off a hunk.
Dunbar starts down the hill toward the fort. He watches the
horizon as he goes.
His long day has drawn to a close. Dunbar sits on the stoop
of his quarters. His journal open in his lap. The sign over
the doorway has been straightened. Dunbar is staring at
something.
One hundred yards away, sitting in the grass is the outline
of a wolf.
With a grunt Dunbar lugs an army saddle out of the supply
house and starts for the door. He slows to a stop and stares
down at the saddle as if in a trance. In a moment he is
tossing the saddle back where he found it.
Dunbar is leading Cisco to the top of a low hill. He glances
over his shoulder and sees that he is being followed.
The wolf with two socks stops when Dunbar looks back at him.
Dunbar watches him curiously for a moment and continues
leading Cisco up the hill. But now he's glancing regularly
over his shoulder and discovers that as he moves, so does
the wolf.
Reaching the top of the hill, Dunbar pauses. He pulls out
the pocket telescope and sweeps the prairie. There is nothing.
Now Dunbar swings onto Cisco's bare back and with a last
glance back at the wolf starts down the rise and on to the
open prairie at an easy canter. We follow for a little
distance. Dunbar glances once more over his shoulder.
The wolf is sitting on top of the hill watching. He has
decided to come no further.
Considerable time has passed. Dunbar, bundled warmly against
the chill of an oncoming storm, and Cisco are coming back
into camp from a hunting foray. A brace of grouse is slung
over Cisco's withers.
It's storming outside. Rain is pouring down, its patter broken
from time to time by spectacular flashes of lightning and
the boom of thunder.
But inside it's cozy. The quarters are still crowded but
considerable order has been brought to bear on the place.
He is just finishing up the grouse and a pile of bones sits
on the table. Open at his side is his journal.
A great bolt of lightning strikes outside, filling the room
with violent white light. Dunbar walks to the door and tosses
out a handful of bones. Two Socks scurries to collect the
bones and retreats under the shelter of a nearby tree.
Just as Dunbar did on his trip out with Timmons, someone is
running a palm over the tips of the tall prairie grass. This
hand, however, is red.
A lone Indian is standing in the grass, his pony at his side.
He is a real Indian; tough, wild and free. He is a person of
special maturity. He radiates wisdom and is a man of
responsibility in his community. He is a Sioux medicine man.
He is KICKING BIRD.
Dunbar is squatting naked at the edge of the stream, pounding
the dirt out of his trousers on a little rock ledge. He rises,
wringing out the pants, and wades across the river.
On the opposite bank he spreads the pants on a low bush.
Then he looks along the river. For some distance every bush
and shrub is draped with the lieutenant's laundry, all of it
drying in the sun.
The spectacular face of Kicking Bird is staring at something.
He's looking thoughtfully at the "new" Fort Sedgewick; the
tidy grounds, the great awning, the repaired corral. The
beautiful, buckskin standing inside.
Comfortable with his nakedness, Dunbar is meandering along
the stream in no particular hurry. He's very white. His skin
practically sparkles in the sun.
Dunbar is making his way up the bluff. The steepest part is
at the lip and here he drops to all fours.
Dunbar's face comes into view. He freezes.
Someone is creeping under the shade of the awning... an
aboriginal man.
Dunbar's head pops down behind the bluff.
The lieutenant is down on his naked haunches. His heart is
pounding in his ears. Sweat has broken out on his face. His
mouth is dry as ash.
He's playing back images in fragments. A deerskin shirt,
strands of hair sewn along each sleeve. Fringed leggins. A
dark, faded breechclout. Moccasins with beading. A single,
large feather drooping behind a head of shiny, black hair.
Braids wrapped in fur. A lethal stone club hanging from a
red hand. No eyebrows on a magnificent, primitive face.
Dunbar stays in a crouch, trying to think on jellied legs.
His breathing has quickened. His mouth is open.
A horses' whinny startles him.
Ever so slowly, the lieutenant peers over the bluff.
The aboriginal man is in the corral. He's walking slowly
toward Cisco. One hand is held out reassuringly, the other
is grasping a rope. He's making gentle, cooing sounds and is
only a step or two from being able to loop his line over the
horse's neck.
Kicking Bird jumps straight into the air. As he lands he
whirls to meet the voice that startled him.
Dunbar is coming. His hands are clenched and his arms are
swinging stiffly at his sides.
Kicking Bird has turned to stone at the sight of this horror.
With a sharp intake of breath, he staggers back a few steps.
Then he turns and runs, tearing through the corral fence as
if it were made of twigs. He leaps onto his horse and quirts
the pony into full gallop.
Dunbar is watching from the yard. His jaw is clenched, his
hands are still fisted.
The great grassland is empty. Kicking Bird is gone.
The first of three carbine boxes is lugged off the stack.
The three boxes are stacked on the open prairie. Suddenly a
shovelful of dirt flies out of an unseen spot next to the
crates. Another flying shovelful. And another.
The last square of sod is placed carefully on the surface of
the earth. Dunbar drives a bleached rib bone into the ground
at an angle just in front of his cache.
Dunbar steps back from his work. The replaced sod is
invisible. The guns will not be found.
The lieutenant sits atop Cisco scouting along the bluff.
Fort Sedgewick lies in the background.
Dunbar's journal lies open on his bunk. We hear a digging
sound in the background. The lieutenant is facing the wall
of his quarters. Using a bayonet as a cutting tool, he has
carved a window out of the sod. He's nearly finished and is
just tidying up.
Finished, he retreats to his bunk and sits staring across at
his new window. He glances at the journal by his side and
has a thought. He picks it up and starts to write.
An old Indian man sits in the shade outside his lodge. His
skin is leathery, his hair grey and wispy but his eyes are
bright as diamonds. He is TEN BEARS, well past sixty, but
still strong enough to be the head man. He is, for the most
part, oblivious to the GRANDCHILD squirming in his lap.
He's smoking a long-stemmed pipe, but the main object of his
interest is an old woman squatting next to him... PRETTY
SHIELD. She's pounding away at something in a bowl.
Ten Bears looks up to notice Kicking Bird. The medicine man
is passing not far away and Ten Bears' eyes follow him
carefully, not glancing away until Kicking Bird has ducked
into his lodge.
The old woman looks up from her pounding but does not respond.
Ten Bears gives his wife a challenging look and she bristles.
Ten Bears accepts this. Then he looks down at the bowl.
Ten Bears looks once more at the entrance of Kicking Bird's
lodge.
Kicking Bird sits next to the fire playing with his son but
he is preoccupied with something.
There is a rustle of movement at the tent flap, and Ten Bears
peers in.
The little boy races over to the old chief, Kicking Bird
makes a move to pull him back, but Ten Bears indicates the
boy should stay.
There is silence as the two men settle themselves by the
fire, the little boy content in Ten Bears' lap.
A brief silence.
Kicking Bird seems suddenly uncomfortable. The little boy
leaves.
Ten Bears picks up the pipe and puffs away, seemingly without
care.
Ten Bears' eyes get big for a moment. Then he thinks.
Ten Bears thinks some more.
Ten Bears rubs at his old eyes with both hands.
A teenaged boy, SMILES A LOT and his two buddies OTTER and
WORM lie prone outside Ten Bears' home. They are peeking
under the tipi's rolled-up sides. Their eyes are wide, for
inside there's plenty to see and hear. The village's most
influential warriors have squeezed into the lodge for this
big and important meeting
The eldest and most respected men of the band, including Ten
Bears, his pal STONE CALF, an influential warrior named WIND
IN HIS HAIR, and Kicking Bird are seated around the fire.
Crowded around them, in a high state of excitement, are the
village's leading warriors. The meeting is in progress.
There is a little murmuring around the fire, and it goes
silent. Wind In His Hair rises to speak.
Kicking Bird pauses here. Everyone is listening attentively.
There is a surge of enthusiasm in the lodge and Wind In His
Hair is riding the crest of it.
This parting shot prompts a good-natured round of laughter.
This is the best idea so far and there is much talk around
the fire. They quiet down as Ten Bears prepares to speak.
He drops his head, closes his eyes and starts to fall asleep.
The meeting is over.
Inside the meeting is breaking up. But Smiles A Lot is no
longer watching. He's lost in thought, as if he has got
something on his mind.
Now he comes out of it. With a last look into the lodge, he
sneaks off into the night.
Three boys Otter, Worm and their leader Smiles A Lot, are
riding to the fort.
Smiles A Lot stops, just realizing that the other two have
fallen behind. He rides back to investigate.
Smiles a Lot trots his pony over to Otter.
Otter and Worm have blank expressions.
Dunbar is snoring. The lantern is turned down low. A horse
whinnies loudly and Dunbar arises.
In the next instant there is a pounding of hooves and the
yelping of Indian boys.
Reeling with sleep, Dunbar is up and moving. He grabs a rifle
and lurches for the door.
As he runs through the door he forgets to duck under the
wooden cross beam. His skull cracks resoundingly against
the. overhang and Dunbar slumps onto his back... out cold.
The three boys are shrieking as they race across the prairie
with their prize. Otter has Cisco by a lead line. Smiles A
Lot gallops alongside.
To Smiles A Lot's amazement, Otter is suddenly gone. He's
zooming backward in midair.
Otter comes to ground a few yards back, throwing up a puff
of dust. Cisco has screeched to a halt. Now he rears up,
twisting until the rope is free of Otter. Then he sticks his
tail in the air and makes tracks in the direction of the
fort. Worm chases after Cisco as Smiles A Lot sees to Otter
Smiles A Lot pulls his pony up next to Otter and peers down
at the fallen boy.
This squabble is interrupted by Worm's return. He gallops up
and jumps off his pony.
Worm shakes his head in frustration. Otter grabs a handful
of dirt and flings it at Smiles A Lot and Worm.
It's growing light and Dunbar is just coming to. He rolls to
one side and touches the egg that has risen on his forehead.
He hears movement in the yard and looks out.
Cisco is pawing the ground. The Indian line still around his
neck.
Dunbar is sitting naked in the shallow river below the fort.
He has worked up a good lather on his face and is shaving.
The big Navy revolver and his gunbelt are slung over his
shoulder. Dunbar glances at the far bluff.
Two Socks is sitting quietly, watching the shaving ritual
below.
The lieutenant is finishing shaving his moustache. He stares
onto the surface of the water trying to get it just right.
Once again he glances up at Two Socks.
Two Socks' attention has been diverted. He's on guard, staring
intently across the river.
Dunbar looks quickly at the bluff nearest the fort. Everything
is still. He looks back at Two Socks.
The wolf is gone.
The lieutenant hears something now. Hoofbeats. Hoofbeats
coming in a rush.
He bursts from the water and scrambles up the incline.
They're streaming past him. FIVE MOUNTED WARRIORS bunched
around Cisco: raw, powerful men on painted, feathered ponies.
Wind In His Hair is one of them.
Their faces are streaked with colorful designs, their weapons
slung around the shoulders, their nearly naked bodies all
sinew and bone. They are the full and breathtaking glory of
war.
Dunbar is struck dumb. He stands still as the pageant passes
in front of him.
The sight of Dunbar troubles Wind In His Hair, so much that
he pulls up a hundred yards away. He sits a moment on his
whirling pony, trying to decide if he should confront this
white god.
He makes a warrior's choice. Wind In His Hair shouts to his
fellows to go on and charges down the slope... straight for
Dunbar.
Dunbar's eyes are fixed on the closing horseman. He can't
move.
Wind In His Hair is coming flat out, his lance extended. At
the last moment he pulls up so hard that the black pony skids
to a sit. The horse is up quickly and hard to manage. He
pitches back and forth only a few feet in front of Lieutenant
Dunbar.
Dunbar stares expressionlessly into the Sioux's eyes. He
doesn't blink.
Wind In His Hair suddenly turns his pony and whips after his
comrades. A big smile breaks out across his face.
Dunbar stares after the disappearing horse and rider. He
feels the weight of the gun and lets it drop to the ground.
For two or three steps he staggers toward the quarters, but
his legs give way and he falls face first in a dead faint.
Wind In His Hair is riding hard and happy. He really fixed
that white god. But as he clears the brow of a rise, a
riderless horse blows past him, running in the opposite
direction.
Cisco's running back, to the fort at full speed, the lines
of two ropes flying behind him.
The big warrior's smile is gone. He wheels his pony and
charges over the rise, nearly colliding with another warrior
who has been in hot pursuit of Cisco. The warrior pulls up
and looks helplessly at Wind In His Hair. But Wind In His
Hair's attention is focused on the rest of his party. The
three remaining warriors who rode with him are all on foot.
One is bending over a man lying unconscious on the ground.
The third is limping badly, trying to catch his horse.
Wind In His Hair glances back in the direction of the fort,
but the buckskin is already gone.
He starts down the incline to help his friends.
Wind In His Hair and his friends, two of them riding double,
are going slowly home when they see a COURIER coming in their
direction. They rein in waiting for the young man cantering
toward them.
He speaks directly to Wind In His Hair.
Wind In His Hair says nothing.
Several travois are parked in a clearing. It's a scene of
terrible woe. On the travois are dead bodies. Women members
of several families are grieving as they collect the dead
men.
Some are shrieking, some are crying softly, and some are
beating themselves.
One group is just beginning to hoist a body off its litter
when a strange looking woman appears in the clearing. She's
been running. Her light, cherry-colored hair is tangled.
Her face is creased with pain and disbelief as she rushes
forward, crying out in Sioux. She pushes through the other
women and tackles the body, taking it to the ground.
She climbs atop the dead man, cradles his head against her
face and says a single word softly.
It is his name and she whispers it again.
Of course there is no answer. With each saying of the name
she is more desperate, her voice growing louder and louder.
She arches her back eerily and wails the name to the heavens
before flinging herself back at the lifeless face.
At last the other mourners feel compelled to drag her away.
The little woman does not go easily.
Her name is STANDS WITH A FIST.
The lieutenant rides, a silhouette against a harvest moon.
Lieutenant Dunbar has gotten a beautiful shine out of his
best boots. He's putting the finishing touches on one of the
toes.
Dunbar places the boot next to its mate and turns to inspect
a dress tunic laid out on the bunk. His open journal is lying
next to it. He picks at little pieces of lint and brushes at
the smudges.
The buckskin's ears are pricked and his eyes are set.
Something has his complete attention.
The "something" is Lieutenant John Dunbar. He looks like a
recruiting poster: full dress uniform, red sash, saber
clanking at his side, hair tied in a neat pony tail, knee-
length riding boots. And all of it is gleaming... from the
brass buttons to the gold epaulettes to the army issue belt
buckle.
The red sash flutters and Cisco shies to one side. Dunbar
slaps at the sash, calms his horse and jumps on.
We stop with them at the supply house. Old Glory is standing
against one of the crumbling walls. The flag has been affixed
to a long willow branch. Dunbar sweeps it up and sticks the
staff into one of his boots.
They start off at a jog, the flag popping in the stiff morning
breeze. Just as they are getting small in the distance, Two
Socks comes into view.
Lieutenant Dunbar has ridden deep into the prairie. Watching
the sky, he takes a drink out of his canteen. The lieutenant
hears something, he turns Cisco in that direction. He listens
harder. A weird sort of singing. Warily he goes ahead.
Stands With A Fist is sitting under a solitary cottonwood.
Her hands are folded on her lap. A blood-stained knife is
held between them. She has ritually slashed her arms. The
cuts are not deep -- but all are running with blood. Blood
pours from a deep cut in her thigh.
She lets her song fade to nothing and bows her head. She
dabs at a large pool of blood spreading in the ground next
to her thigh. Suddenly she's alert. Stands With A Fist has
heard something too... a strange popping sound. She turns.
The gleaming buckskin horse is standing thirty or forty feet
behind her on the top of the knoll. A white soldier is sitting
on the horse. A white soldier with a sword, a bright uniform
and a red sash. And most amazing of all, no face.
A shift in the breeze has wrapped the popping red, white,
and blue flag around his head. One of the soldier's hands is
trying to claw it away from his face.
Dunbar pulls the flag away.
It's an Indian woman alright. But now that she is staring at
him open-mouthed and afraid, he can see that there is
something odd about her.
Too late for further study. She's risen and has taken a slow
step backward from the knoll. She's covered with blood.
Reflexively, he offers a helping hand and calls after her.
She's still backing down the hill, her steps a little faster
now. He's following her at a walk.
She's reached the base of the knoll and has begun to run.
Dunbar is trotting after her.
She's too weak to run and falls face first in the grass. She
starts to crawl.
Dunbar slips off Cisco and reaches down tentatively for her
shoulder. She screams at his touch and he pulls away. But he
follows on foot as she crawls.
He takes her again, this time holding her firmly. She
struggles mightily, twisting onto her back. She lashes out
at his face but he grabs her hands, holding them tight.
They're nose to nose.
He can't believe he heard it and she can't believe she said
it.
She spits out a Stream of Sioux curses, throws her head back
and wails like a wolf. Then she passes out.
She's lying in the same spot, still unconscious. The cuts on
her arms have been bandaged up with strips of Old Glory.
Modestly, Dunbar lifts her dress to get at the bad thigh
wound. As he ties it off, the lieutenant notices how white
her skin is. He runs a finger over it. She is very still and
he presses an ear to her heart. She's still breathing.
Dunbar is on Cisco. His big impression is gone. The uniform,
and his hands and face are smeared with Stands With A Fist's
blood. The girl is slung in front of him.
His arms are holding her. Her face is pressed against his
chest. They've come a good distance and are approaching a
smokey cloud.
Smiles A Lot, Worm and Otter (who now sports a crude splint
on his arm) are occupying an open space in the midst of a
huge pony herd.
They should be on guard against enemies but the three boys
are sitting on the ground, absorbed in a gambling game.
Dunbar is skirting the edge of the herd. Leaving the horses
behind him, the lieutenant makes his way up a gentle slope.
A powerful vision is upon him.
Ten Bears' village is rising slowly, like a curtain going
up. The smoke from many fires, the willow poles fanning
against the sky, the conical houses covered with well-used
hides, the horses along the river, the children, the women,
the men. An ancient tableau, fully alive before his eyes.
Dunbar has stopped on the slope leading down to the village,
taking it all in. No one has seen him. He can hear human
voices drifting up from the camp.
Stands With A Fist coughs lightly against his tunic and the
lieutenant moves Cisco ahead at a walk.
A woman and her children have come out of the breaks along
the river and are marching back to the village when one of
the kids sees him. With an ear-splitting shriek, the woman
grabs up her children and runs screaming for the safety of
the village.
There's pandemonium amongst the lodges. Everyone seems to be
running everywhere at once.
Dunbar pulls Cisco to a halt a hundred yards from the first
of the conical houses and slides off, taking the girl up in
his arms.
The people of Ten Bear's village, realizing now that there
is only one white man and that he is carrying someone, are
massing with great curiosity on the outskirts of the town.
Warriors, some of them mounted, have taken the front ranks.
The women and children and elderly are standing just behind.
Initial panic has given way to a steady buzzing as everyone
jockeys for a better look.
Still holding Stands With A Fist in his arms, Dunbar suddenly
stops on a familiar face... Wind In His Hair.
He lifts the girl resting in his arms and holds her out...
as in offering.
The Sioux buzz is stronger now. The mounted warriors are
getting excited.
Suddenly, Wind In His Hair breaks ranks and starts for Dunbar
at a determined walk. A nasty war club is held tightly in
hand.
Dunbar stands his ground.
Wind In His Hair halts only a few steps in front of Dunbar.
He barks at the intruder as he takes another step or two.
Another step and he is close enough to touch the white man.
Dunbar doesn't flinch. And Wind In His Hair's harangue is
definitely part bluster. He's very curious about the woman
in Dunbar's arms and now he peers down at her face.
The lieutenant looks down too and in a flash she is torn out
of his grasp.
Holding her in one strong arm, Wind In His Hair backs a pace
or two and shouts once more at the lieutenant.
He raises his club and shakes it at Dunbar.
Though he doesn't understand the words, Dunbar gets the
message. As he goes for his horse, Wind In His Hair marches
back to his people with Stands With A Fist.
There is great commotion as the crowd surges in around Wind
In His Hair.
With a look of profound disappointment, Dunbar walks away on
Cisco.
Otter, Worm and Smiles A Lot are riding in, drawn by the
ruckus in the village. They see the white soldier oh his
horse leaving the camp. They see the tumult in the village
and realize they are in trouble, again.
Some of the young, mounted warriors are shouting taunts at
the departing soldier, calling for him to come back and fight.
They seem set to take out after him when Kicking Bird suddenly
appears in front of their ponies.
No one is going to argue with one of the band's leading men.
The young warriors shout a few more taunts and turn away.
The medicine man glances after the boys who just came in.
Each boy, confronted now by an angry father or uncle, is
being jerked off his pony. There's going to be discipline.
Kicking Bird looks back at the lieutenant.
Dunbar's head is down and his shoulders are slumped. It is a
sight that makes the wheels in Kicking Bird's head turn.
Another council is in progress. As before, the leading men
are seated around Ten Bears' fire while the other warriors
stand packed in the shadows. Wind In His Hair is seated close
to the elders.
Wind In His Hair jumps into the conversation.
There are many yeses in response to this. As is his custom,
Ten Bears lets the outburst subside, seeming unruffled all
the while. Casually, he pops a piece of meat into his mouth
and begins to chew.
Dunbar is sitting cross-legged in the grass. His mouth is
occupied with chewing. In one hand is a knife, in the other
is a chunk of slab bacon. He saws off a slice and extends
it, waiting patiently.
The wolf is sitting only a few feet away. He wants the offered
meat but cannot bring himself to eat from a human hand.
Finally, Dunbar flips the bacon into the grass and Two Socks
pounces on it. He takes his prize toward the river and out
of view.
Dunbar starts for his quarters. He stops. The hair on the
back of his neck is standing straight up.
Six Sioux warriors, THE ESCORT, are sitting atop their ponies
high on the ridge.
Dunbar buttons his tunic and casts a quick, backward glance
at the quarters. A rifle is standing near the door.
Dunbar decides not to go after it. He straightens his bearings
and he watches the approaching riders. It's only two -- Wind
In His Hair and Kicking Bird. The lieutenant bows at the
waist.
The two men slide off their ponies. Dunbar throws an
unreturned wave to the escort warriors.
There is a moment or two of silence.
There is no response.
Dunbar disappears inside his quarters.
Wind In His Hair and Kicking Bird are sitting comfortably
under the awning, each holding steaming army-issue cups.
They are staring straight ahead with a curious expression.
Dunbar is turning a handle on a machine. It is a coffee
grinder.
The last of the beans goes down and Dunbar pauses for dramatic
effect. Then he pulls out the drawer containing the fresh
grounds and passes it to the medicine man. Kicking Bird and
Wind In His Hair both sniff the contents.
Dunbar gestures at their still full mugs -- neither one of
them has taken a drink.
Dunbar reaches for a sack by the fire. Holding it in front
of him, Dunbar suggests that Wind In His Hair put some of
its contents into his mug.
Wind In His Hair finally does, but his blank expression
indicates that he doesn't know what difference this could
make.
Dunbar takes a lick at his fingers, suggesting that Wind In
His Hair should do the same. A smile creeps over his face as
the universal appeal of sugar is taking hold. Wind In His
Hair has licked every bit off each finger.
Wind In His Hair doesn't wait for Kicking Bird's answer. He
reaches over and dumps a good amount in Kicking Bird's cup,
adding some more to his own for good measure.
There is no response. Wind In His Hair's attention is now on
Cisco.
Wind In His Hair's interest borders on rude. Prompted by a
light tap on his leg from Kicking Bird, Wind In His Hair
turns his attention back to Dunbar.
No argument from Wind In His Hair.
Kicking Bird and Wind In His Hair are baffled.
The lieutenant is trying to jam a wadded blanket under the
back of his tunic.
Kicking Bird doesn't respond. He's still intent on the
lieutenant. In wedging the blanket under his tunic, Dunbar
has become a hunchback. He bends over in a weird attitude,
and with a finger peeking over each side of his head, he
begins a bizarre display of dancing, punctuated with snorts
and bellows.
Kicking Bird nods his assent and Dunbar flashes a pleased
smile.
Dunbar is watching Kicking Bird and Wind In His Hair walk
their horses up the ridge to meet the waiting escort. Each
horse has a gift of coffee and sugar slung over its withers.
Occasionally, Wind In His Hair dips a hand into one of the
bags and carefully licks each finger.
Dunbar waves up at them but there is no response.
Dunbar is standing in the same spot, it is a new day
Leaving their ever present escort behind, Kicking Bird and
Wind In His Hair ride into the fort.
Kicking Bird's pony is carrying something large and bulky on
his withers. A buffalo robe. Dunbar walks up to greet them.
Kicking Bird returns the welcome and signs to him as he
speaks.
Dunbar can only shake his head no.
Kicking Bird accepts this and dismounts.
Dunbar throws his customary wave but the escort remains
noncommittal.
Dunbar is lying on his buffalo robe, his hand runs against
the grain of the thick fur. He begins writing in his journal.
He rolls on his back, and lays aside the journal, practicing
the hand signals.
It's raining. High on a hill, the Indian escort waits
stoically, horses heads bowed in the drizzle. On the haunches
of one of the ponies is a single deer.
Down below, Wind In His Hair and Kicking Bird are still
mounted and converse with Dunbar using sign talk.
Dunbar suggests they take some of his supplies but Kicking
Bird will not stand for this. He waves Dunbar off. The three
men say their goodbyes, and Dunbar as usual throws a wave to
the six men on the hill.
Unexpectedly, one of them returns it and the other five react
with surprise.
Kicking Bird and Wind In His Hair disappear over the hill,
followed by their escort.
Lightning bursts far out on the prairie.
Dunbar huddles beneath the warmth of his buffalo robe. He is
finishing up the second of two drawings. It is a portrait of
Wind In His Hair, he carefully titles it "The Fierce One."
He has already completed a likeness of Kicking Bird and
underneath it the words "The Quiet One."
Several children are playing close-by as Stands With A Fist
works over a staked-out hide, scraping away the excess flesh.
Though her arms are lined with scabs her work is methodical
and unforced. She seems recovered.
She looks up to see the medicine man looming over her.
Except for Kicking Bird and Stands With A Fist, the tipi is
empty. They are just seating themselves at the firepit in
the center of the lodge. A brief silence, during which Kicking
Bird studies the girl with the bowed head.
Kicking Bird is leading up to something and Stands With A
Fist fears it. She keeps her head bowed.
Kicking Bird stops himself, he knows this must be hard. She
brings her green eyes to bear on the medicine man, waiting
to hear more.
He pauses letting this sink in.
She is not much reassured by this. In the way of a defeatist
she lowers her eyes once more.
Kicking Bird waits. Still she does not raise her head.
This outburst shocks Stands With A Fist, she runs out of the
lodge.
Stands With A Fist rushes past BLACK SHAWL, her face covered
with tears. Now Kicking Bird comes out. Black Shawl looks at
Kicking Bird, his face is not happy.
Stands With A Fist is tearing through the thick willows
growing alongside the river. She's crying her heart out.
The big cry is over, but Stands With A Fist is still sniffling
as she emerges on a little patch of beach-next to the river.
She sits herself down under a cottonwood and looks hollowly
at the surface of the water in front of her.
Somewhere in the distance is the sound of many drums, with a
sigh she drops her head.
Then, as if shocked by some unseen force, her eyes spring
open. Wide and unblinking, her eyes stare deeply into space.
Someone is calling. The voice is so faint at first that the
word can't be heard. But the calling grows and suddenly the
word is upon her.
A little girl of seven, CHRISTINE, is lying in the grass of
a sod roof. Next to her is ten year-old WILLIE. They are
planning their wedding and staring up at the sky.
Like many youngsters she's not eager to heed the persistent
call of her mother.
Reluctantly, the little girl gets up and looks over the edge
of the roof to see her mother holding yet another child. She
seems anxious.
FOUR PAWNEE are riding up in the background. TWO MEN are
moving out to meet them.
Willie is peeking over the edge of the roof. An old muzzle-
loading rifle is by his side. He whispers to her.
Down in the yard, out beyond a rough table set with the
leavings of a Sunday dinner, two white men on foot are talking
to the four mounted Pawnee warriors.
It's an argument. As a baby cries somewhere inside the house
the two white men sign the Indians to go away. The Pawnee
make no move to go however, and with their patience at an
end, the two white men turn back to the house.
One of the warriors brings his hatchet down and nails a white
man between the shoulder blades. The injured man grunts and
hops sideways. The other runs for the house but is cut down
by arrows.
Women begin to scream.
Willie is scooting down the roof, his face white with fear.
He gives her a hard shove which sends her rolling down the
roof.
Christine runs past the point where the roof meets the natural
hillside and down into the draw. She's running toward us. In
the background we can see Willie on the edge of the roof,
aiming his squirrel gun into the yard. He fires once, then
grasping the gun like a club, he leaps off the roof and
disappears.
Christine never looks back. She runs up the draw as fast as
her skinny young legs can carry her.
The moon is up. Christine is feebly clawing at the ground,
trying to pry herself out of a tiny hole. She gives up. Then,
from the burrow's dark entrance comes the thin, cracking
voice of a little girl.
Stands With A Fist is still in shock. The drumming in the
village is very loud now. She rises unsteadily to her feet
and starts back to camp.
The moon is full. As we look down on the fort we can hear a
new sound coming off the prairie. A light rumbling.
Lieutenant Dunbar is asleep in the moonlight. The rumbling
is getting louder. It wakes him. He gropes about, lights the
lantern and listens to the strange, powerful sound.
Something's in the air. He holds the lantern toward the
ceiling. Particles of dirt and dust are being shaken from
the roof. It's the earth that's trembling.
Dressed in only pants and boots, Dunbar walks along the bluff
above the river, his lantern held out in front of him. The
sound is tremendous now. Dunbar stops as a great wall of
dust rises before him.
At the same time, he realizes something is alive behind the
wall of dust, he recognizes the sound... the sound of
thousands of hoofbeats.
He sees one veer out. And now another. And another, darting
briefly from the great cloud of dust. The most powerful force
on the prairie now seems like the most powerful force on
earth as it thunders by.
The buffalo.
Dunbar and Cisco are running flat out in the moonlight.
The village is coming up. A great fire is blazing at the far
end. Horse and rider speed past the first lodge.
It's an important mission for the lieutenant. As he gallops
through the village, he says one word over and over, trying
to remember the correct pronunciation. It's the Sioux word
for buffalo.
Everyone has gathered around the great blaze. In the center
of the circle close to the fire, the buffalo men are dancing.
Others are dancing too. The music is very loud.
The little buckskin is out of his head with speed. He doesn't
answer the bit when Dunbar first tries to pull him up.
People scatter in all directions, as Dunbar and Cisco charge
into their midst.
Dunbar pulls back with all his might, and the buckskin sits
down. He's wet from his long ride, and Dunbar can't stay on
his back. As Cisco rears, he slides off and tumbles onto his
back.
Angry warriors pile on top of him. Dunbar shouts out the
word for buffalo, yelling it over and over as the warriors
pummel him.
So many men have rushed into the fray that none can deal the
lieutenant a decisive blow. They roll about in the dust.
Just as Dunbar's cries have begun to lose their strength, he
feels a sudden lessening of the weight upon him.
As the men pile off, Dunbar is left flat on his back. His
lip is split and blood is streaming from his nose.
He's looking into a familiar face. The man's head is covered
with the full skin and feathers of an eagle. Kicking Bird.
Kicking Bird doesn't understand or can't hear. He brings his
face close to Dunbar's.
Kicking Bird raises up and yells it out to his people.
For a fleeting moment there is shocked silence. Then the
Sioux explode with excitement.
Still dazed, Dunbar is pulled to his feet. The people are
surging in around him with yelps of joy.
A wide stretch of prairie, falling away to nothing.
The buffalo have left a trail in the form of a tremendous
swath of torn-up ground, several hundred yards from side to
side.
Indians on horseback move into the picture.
Most of Ten Bears' camp is moving out in a long, noisy column.
Spirits are high. First come the lead scouts, followed by
Ten Bears and his advisors, Kicking Bird and wind In His
Hair among them. A large body of warriors come next. Behind
these men are the women, children and elderly. Dunbar is
riding at the head of the last group.
The attitudes of the people have changed significantly. People
who catch his eye are openly smiling at the lieutenant.
An old woman comes alongside and offers him a piece of dried
meat, patting his hand as he takes it.
Here comes Smiles A Lot, Worm and Otter, all on ponies,
galloping up beside him. They want to play.
He motions for Dunbar to break ranks and while the lieutenant
is puzzling this out, a chorus of cries comes from the
column's front.
Three far-ranging scouts are coming in at a run.
The scouts pull up in front of Ten Bears to make their report.
There's no way to know what's going on but something important
is happening.
Wind In His Hair suddenly breaks ranks and rides back to the
main body of warriors. A dozen warriors strip off their shirts
and leggings. They're ready in moments. Then, with Wind In
His Hair leading them, the party breaks away from the column
and rides east at a gallop.
The column resumes its southward march.
The day has grown hot as the column continues its march
through changing terrain.
Dunbar is suffering some. The heat and dust are monstrous.
At the moment however, he's most concerned with Stands With
A Fist. She's riding closeby and he watches her with interest.
It's easier to see now that she was once white.
Suddenly she looks in his direction. The lieutenant quickly
tips his hat, but she turns her shy eyes away before he has
finished the motion.
Kicking Bird is riding down the line. The medicine man
gestures Dunbar forward and the lieutenant guides Cisco out
of line.
Through her tangled hair, Stands With A Fist watches the
soldier and the medicine man ride up the line.
Dunbar and Kicking Bird are riding together at the flank of
Ten Bears' entourage.
Far in the distance, the lieutenant sees something strange
on the prairie... pink bumps are dotting the landscape up
ahead. And black specks are moving about on the bumps.
Beneath droves of scavenging black birds lies the body of a
buffalo. His hide has been peeled off and his tongue has
been cut out. The rest of his body has been left to rot in
the sun.
The column, so noisy and happy before, winds its way through
the killing ground in silence. There must be twenty-five
buffalo like the one we saw close up, all of them stripped
and rotting.
Dunbar looks queasy. The lieutenant glances at the medicine
man riding next to him. Kicking Bird looks sick too. Dunbar
looks away. The entire column is stretched along the killing
ground, looking.
A naked cow, covered with birds, lies on her side. Her new
born calf, doomed to death, cries for his dead mother. And
next to the calf, Dunbar sees something else. He sees wagon
tracks and the booted footprints of white men.
The column is clear of the killing ground and heading deeper
into the prairie. They have left everything untouched.
While Kicking Bird's lodge rises behind her, Stands With A
Fist digs out a firepit. She looks up from her work.
Watching bashfully from several yards away is Lieutenant
Dunbar. Now that she has seen him he starts forward, perhaps
to try some more talk.
Dunbar turns to find Kicking Bird sitting on a pony just
behind him. Two dozen mounted BUFFALO SCOUTS are gathered
around him. Kicking Bird points at Cisco, indicating that
Dunbar should join them.
Tipping his hat to Stands With A Fist, Dunbar hustles away
to his horse.
Stands With A Fist faces the pit she's digging, not bothering
to look up as hoofbeats drum their way out of the temporary
camp. She seems to have lost herself in her own hands... the
hands that are digging out the soft prairie earth.
There is crying but when Stands With A Fist looks up there
is just one of Kicking Bird's children standing there smiling
at her. She goes back to her digging.
The first light streaks through the burrow entrance.
Christine is exerting herself mightily in an effort to move.
But she can't and again she begins to cry.
More sounds from down below in the canyon. Hoofbeats. And a
whinny or two. No way to tell whether this is friend or foe.
But she can't stay in the burrow.
She listens. The hoofbeats are gone.
Someone is coming up the slope.
A moment later, hands are clawing at the walls of the burrow
and she is looking into three, surprised Sioux faces. The
face in the center is recognizable. A YOUNGER KICKING BIRD.
Two dozen riderless Indian ponies are tethered at the base
of the draw.
With Kicking Bird and the other buffalo scouts, Lieutenant
Dunbar is sneaking up one side of the draw. They all reach
the summit together and peer over.
They are there by the thousands, grazing quietly in the
twilight. The buffalo.
The buffalo scouts, Dunbar included, are galloping back to
the temporary camp. It looms ahead of them, the hide-covered
lodges glowing like candles in the last light of day. A big
fire is blazing in the center of camp.
Dunbar hangs back as the other riders go into the noisy camp.
A special event of some kind is taking place. As he looks
this scene over, Dunbar sees something remarkable.
Back in the shadows, behind the fire, is a wagon.
Dunbar and Cisco pace back and forth on the fringes of the
camp. The lieutenant searches for any sign of the white people
who came in the wagon, but finding none, he focuses on the
dancers moving in a circle around the big fire.
One of the men waving his lance is Wind In His Hair. Dunbar's
eyes track up the lance and there he finds the white people.
Hanging from Wind In His Hair's lance tip is a fresh scalp,
blonde and wavy. Several of the other men have scalps too.
None of the hair is Indian.
Dunbar can see into the wagonbed now. A couple of dozen fresh
buffalo hides are stacked in the wagonbed. It's all come
clear. The white men who killed the buffalo for hides and
tongues have themselves been killed.
Dunbar slowly retreats into the shadows.
Cisco has been hobbled nearby, and with the temporary camp
glowing on the plains a half-mile away, Dunbar spreads his
blanket on the open plain.
A huddled body lies covered by the army issue blanket. A
moccasined foot comes into view and prods the blanketed shape.
Lieutenant Dunbar's waking face pops out of the blanket.
Standing over him is Wind In His Hair, stripped of all but
his breechclout. The barrel of his rifle is hanging downward,
swaying in front of the lieutenant's face.
It is occurring to the lieutenant that his time may have run
out.
The warrior swings his rifle into a shooting position, sights
after some imaginary game and imitates the rifle's recoil.
He stares down at Dunbar with a smile, lifts his rifle
overhead and barks out a cry of victory.
The band's best hunters, two dozen of them, are making ready
to chase the buffalo. It's the big time, no event is more
important. The villagers -- mostly women, children, and
elderly -- have gathered around each of the hunters.
The largest audience has gathered around Lieutenant Dunbar
and Wind In His Hair. Wind In His Hair's pony is ready. Great
bolts of yellow lightning adorn his shoulders and rump. Right
now the warrior is drawing the same design along Cisco's
rump.
Dunbar reads this correctly as a great honor and stands by
silently. Wind In His Hair is finished. He looks at Dunbar
and nods at the paint as if asking for a response.
A Sioux voice, using english words, sails out of the circle
of watchers.
Startled the men turn to the sound. The other Sioux are
stunned too.
He takes the warrior's hand in his own and shakes it crisply.
It's the first time we've seen the buffalo up close. They're
fantastic creatures, powerful, brutish, untameable animals
from another age. A great bull turns away from the others
and lifts his purple, horned head to sniff the breeze. He
can detect no sign of trouble and eventually returns to his
browsing.
The hunters are advancing across the prairie, spreading out
in a formation that will encircle part of the herd.
The lightning bolts on Wind In His Hair's pony are in motion.
Cisco's bolts are moving too.
There's a lump in Dunbar's throat. He knows nothing of what
is expected of him but he's doing it anyway. He glances to --
his right at Wind In His Hair and to his left at Kicking
Bird. They're both concentrated on what lies ahead.
From the corner of his eye, he sees Kicking Bird look back.
The lieutenant looks too.
It's a minor flap. Three or four youngsters, eager to
distinguish themselves have trailed too close to the hunters
and are being turned back. Dunbar recognizes one of them as
the boy who took charge of Cisco at the village... Smiles A
Lot.
Like Kicking Bird, Dunbar swings his face back to the front.
They're close enough now to hear the low bellowing of the
herd.
A strike far up on the horned formation. Their ponies leap
forward. The mad dash is on.
Dunbar's hat flies off at first spurt and now the lieutenant
and his horse are hurling over the prairie. The little
buckskin seems to know what is expected of him and has put
every ounce of his muscle to speed. They're burning up the
ground.
When Dunbar looks back over his shoulder, he's shocked to
find that the best buffalo ponies the Sioux's have are far
behind. He and Cisco are on their own.
The herd is in full flight and the sound of their stampede
is overwhelming. The buffalo are very fast but Cisco is
gaining with every stride. They've formed a great running
wall in front of him and now Dunbar can see their rumps and
tails and flying hooves.
Dunbar takes a solid grip on his rifle and shuts his eyes as
if in prayer. The sound of thousands of hooves is deafening.
Dunbar and Cisco have caught the buffalo. A few more strides
and they'll be in.
Dunbar and Cisco are running with the buffalo. A shaggy head
moves in and swipes at Cisco, but the little horse is too
quick and too smart. He dodges away, nearly dumping the
lieutenant in the process.
Dunbar rights himself and fires. It's a wild shot, only
grazing the buffalo's shoulder. The report of the gun
instantly scatters the herd and Dunbar pulls up, dust swirling
all around him.
Sioux hunters stream past him, every man for himself zeroing
in on targets.
Dunbar starts to dismount but something he sees stops him.
A hundred yards away a small hunter is after a handful of
buffalo who have splintered off from the rest. It's Smiles A
Lot, trying to make a kill of his own. As Dunbar watches,
the boy's inexperienced horse shies away and bucks, pitching
the kid to the ground.
A big bull breaks away from the splinter group, lowers his
head and charges.
Dunbar kicks Cisco into a run, spits a spare bullet from his
mouth and rams it into the chamber.
Smiles A Lot is picking himself off the ground. The bull is
in full charge.
Dunbar is riding with his knees. Both hands are holding the
rifle. He'll never make it to the boy in time. He's got to
make the shot. He squeezes the trigger.
The bullet plows home, exploding the bull's heart. The big
buffalo's legs collapse but the momentum of his charge puts
him into a skid. He comes to rest only a few yards away from
Smiles A Lot.
The boy stands as the lieutenant rides up. Smiles A Lot is
dazed but he's okay.
Dunbar hops off next to the dead buffalo. He's a huge one, a
real grandfather and the lieutenant loses himself for a few
moments in contemplation of this tremendous kill. Now he
looks back to check the boy.
Smiles A Lot has caught his pony and is racing away from the
scene of his humiliation.
The sounds of approaching riders turns Dunbar's attention in
a different direction.
The entire village is streaming onto the plains for the
butchering.
The riders bearing down on him are being lead by Wind In His
Hair.
Wind In His Hair jumps off his pony and, smiling broadly,
slaps Dunbar's back with a good-natured blow of
congratulations.
The buffalo has been split open and Wind In His Hair, kneeling
at the bull's side, is feeling around in the cavity. He finds
what he's looking for and gives it a jerk.
It's the liver, still warm and steaming. He offers it to
Dunbar but the lieutenant, not having the faintest idea,
only looks at it blankly.
A sizable crowd has gathered to watch this ritual.
Wind In His Hair sticks the fresh liver in his mouth and
happily bites off a chunk, letting the juices run from the
edges of his mouth. Now he figures the lieutenant knows what
to do, and hands the liver back to him.
Dunbar doesn't want to do this, but with the pressure of so
many eyes and so much good will, he has little choice.
Tentatively, he bites off a small piece and chews it
thoughtfully. It's good.
Encouraged by this good taste, Dunbar takes a man-sized bite.
Shrill Sioux voices rise all around him as they cheer the
lieutenant. Dunbar holds the liver triumphantly over his
head.
Little butchering parties cluster around each fallen buffalo.
Flame begins to lick at each of the bodies and we match
dissolve -- the clusters of people have become groups
surrounding fires at the temporary camp.
All over camp people are crowding around fires, feasting on
fresh meat. Children are playing everywhere, the dogs are
having a field day with scraps and the voices of the people
are happy.
At a little distance, we see Lieutenant Dunbar and Wind In
His Hair excusing themselves from one of the fires. They
start toward us. Wind In His Hair is sucking on a rib bone
and seems to show no sign of slowing down his celebrating.
Dunbar, following a couple paces behind, is a different story.
He's had it. He spreads his hands to indicate an over-sized
belly.
Wind In His Hair doesn't seem to hear. He points at the
epaulettes on Dunbar's tunic.
Wind In His Hair reaches out and fingers the gold lieutenant's
bars. He fingers a couple of the brass buttons as well. The
tunic is something he obviously puts much store in.
He unbuttons the tunic.
He sloughs off the tunic and hands it over. Wind In His Hair
slips out of the magnificent bone-pipe breastplate he's
wearing and gives it to Dunbar as he wriggles into the tunic.
The fit is too tight, the material too scratchy but those
things are of little consequence to Wind In His Hair. He
loves the tunic.
With urging signs he asks the lieutenant to put on the
breastplate. Dunbar slips it over his head and Wind In His
Hair helps him with the ties.
Now it's the lieutenant's turn to be amazed. The breastplate
as craftsmanship at its finest. He runs his fingers over the
ridges of bone now covering him from neck to waist. He looks
up at Wind In His Hair.
The warrior nods approvingly, as though a good deal has heen
struck.
But for Wind In His Hair it is already a trade.
Wind In His Hair spots the next fireside and veers toward
it. Dunbar holds him back.
Wind In His Hair grins. He holds up a single finger.
Still holding up the finger, he guides Dunbar into the
firelight of the next party.
Immediately, men jump up to greet the celebrities. Women
begin to saw off more meat.
As Dunbar gnaws on a rib, he glances at the friendly faces
around the fire. His eyes suddenly stop their roving.
A BIG WARRIOR is wearing the military hat he lost on the
hunt. It's a little too big. The brim touches the top of the
big warrior's ears.
Now the Big Warrior notices that Dunbar is staring at him.
Their eyes meet.
At the sound of these words the cheerful talk around the
fire begins to fade.
Dunbar touches the top of his head and points to his hat.
A silence falls between the two men. wind In His Hair speaks.
The Big Warrior shakes his head. He won't budge.
The other men around the fire murmur their assent. The Big
Warrior thinks for a moment then abruptly gets to his feet.
He looks at his waist and unfastens a knife in a beautiful
worked scabbard. He tosses it across to Dunbar.
The lieutenant examines the trade item a moment. Now he looks
back at the big warrior. A smile breaks slowly across his
face and Dunbar nods. At last he smiles back. It's a trade.
And at that, the cheerful voices around the fire are at it
again.
Dunbar takes his new knife out and as he watches the light
flicker off the blade a voice comes into his ear.
Dunbar looks into his smiling face. He laughs.
He excuses himself and walks away from the light of the fire,
finds himself alone in the shadows, still marveling at his
breastplate.
Wind In His Hair finishes sucking on the rib bone and tosses
it to a dog that's been trailing him. Kicking Bird is walking
toward him. He notices the new tunic and gives wind In His
Hair a dubious look.
Kicking Bird reaches out and feels the strange material on
either side of Wind In His Hair's chest.
Dunbar keeps to the shadows as he makes his way through camp.
Now he slows his step.
Light from another fire is spilling into his path. There's
music too. And singing. The voices are high and feminine.
Dunbar peers around a lodge. A group of young women are
dancing in a clockwise circle. Their steps are light-hearted.
This is dancing purely for the fun of it.
One of the young women spots him standing behind the lodge
and there's a wave of shy giggling as news of "loo ten tant's"
presence is passed along. Embarrassed, Dunbar starts along
the fringe of the fires, nodding politely to the women as he
goes.
One has more courage than the others. She breaks out, takes
his hand and steers him gently into the dance circle. Whatever
resistance he might have is buried by the girl's insistent
encouragement. She keeps showing him the step and the
lieutenant tries to pick it up.
The movement is simple and the music is mesmerizing. Awkward
at first, Dunbar quickly gets the hang of it. In short order,
he's keeping up with the others. And he's enjoying himself.
Soon he has relaxed enough to shut his eyes, carried along
by the eternal sound of the drums. He doesn't notice that
the circle has begun to shrink. There is a touch of the devil
in their eyes.
He bumps into somebody and the woman behind bumps into him.
But the girls just laugh and so does Dunbar. It was a pleasant
accident. But quickly there's another accident. And then all
their bodies are squeezing against his. The girls are
murmuring good things to him. Their hands are touching him
everywhere.
It's okay with Dunbar. Everybody's having a good time. The
drumming suddenly stops however, and the women scatter away
from the fire, leaving Dunbar suddenly alone. Kicking Bird
is standing not far off.
The medicine man says nothing.
The lieutenant does a step or two, trying to explain. Finally,
that strange half-smile appears on Kicking Bird's face.
Stands With A Fist has been watching everything from the
tipi flap. Now she ducks back inside.
The fire is still burning in the center of the lodge. Dunbar
is sleeping soundly.
It's not a moment later that we hear the soft sounds of
mumbling somewhere in the lodge. Then it's quiet. There's
that mumbling again. And now a woman's giggle.
Dunbar stirs, waking and curious, sits up a little and looks
across the fire. There is movement on Kicking Bird's platform.
The medicine man's head and that of his wife come into view
for a second or two before they sink back down into shadow.
The movements and sound that follow become more forceful.
They're having sex.
Embarrassed, the lieutenant averts his eyes, they happen
over the forms of Kicking Bird's deeply sleeping children,
the low-burning fire, and settle on Stands With A Fist's
back.
Lieutenant Dunbar, the sounds of lovemaking floating over
him, peers again in that direction only to meet the smiling
eyes of Kicking Bird and his wife.
Embarrassed again, he stares open-eyed at the ceiling. He
looks like a man who knows something is happening but doesn't
know what it is.
Stands With A Fist's eyes are open too. She doesn't move.
The faintest seam of light is starting to glow on the eastern
horizon.
The camera pans off the tipi to the eastern horizon.
It's the pony herd. And Dunbar is walking in that direction.
His feet leave a trail in the wet grass.
First one, then two, then whole groups of ponies lift their
heads and prick their ears at Dunbar's approach.
Dunbar walks to the edge of this great sea of horses, he
stops and gives a long whistle.
A figure, previously unseen, sits up on the back of a pony.
It's Smiles A Lot. He and Dunbar glance blankly at each other.
But in a moment, both are distracted by movement in the herd.
Horses are being gently eased out of the way by Cisco who is
answering Dunbar's call. A moment later and they are reunited
at the edge of the herd.
Grasping a hunk of Cisco's mane, Dunbar starts to lead him
back to the village. The temporary camp is starting to come
to life. And with Cisco at his side, Dunbar pauses to take
in the scene.
An escort of six warriors is galloping up the bluff to join
the rest of the column as they make their way back to camp.
Dunbar looks on, a travois of meat next to him and gives a
last wave.
The person we see from the waist up bears little resemblance
to the Lieutenant Dunbar we've known.
His long hair hides his face on his slightly bent head. His
skin is not so white anymore, and the great bone-pipe
breastplate covers his torso.
Dunbar starts to write and stops, he repeats this action. It
is clear that as Lieutenant Dunbar, he can find nothing to
say. He lays the pen down momentarily.
There is the scurry of movement and the scratch of tiny paws.
His eyes roam to the place in the corner where sacks of flour
and hard biscuits and other provisions are stored. Watching
the sacks more closely, he sees that they are infested with
mice.
Restlessly, he walks to the doorway, gazing out onto the old
fort. The awning is beginning to tear at the corner. And
then he spots something.
A large prairie chicken is lying in front of the quarters.
Dunbar squats next to it. It's neck carries punctures, and
when he dabs a finger on the wounds, he finds that the blood
is still wet. The lieutenant rises slowly, his sharp eyes
sweeping the fort.
He's waiting patiently in his usual spot on the bluff
overlooking the river. Two Socks.
Dunbar smiles and shakes his head. Watching his old friend,
he picks up the bird and begins to pluck with an ease that
suggests he's had some experience.
Dunbar is gnawing happily at the last of the bird, still on
its skewer. After a couple of bites, he slips the carcass
off the stick and chucks it out to Two Socks. He licks his
fingers and gazes out into the night.
Two Socks has taken his dinner and retreated to the shadows.
He munches contentedly until a strange sound jolts him to
attention.
At the fort is an odd sight. Dunbar is dancing around the
fire, occasionally singing out an energetic whoop.
Two Socks is caught up in the scene and lets out a howl of
his own. It could be the stone age.
The silhouettes of three Indians are watching the strange
performance below. One of them is Wind In His Hair. Down
below Dunbar continues to dance.
There is nothing for miles.
Cisco and Dunbar are walking toward us. His boots are pretty
worn and his striped trousers have faded to almost nothing.
The breastplate shines in the sun. His rifle lies in the
crook of his arm, Indian style.
Dunbar twists around on Cisco and looks back across the
prairie. He calls out.
Dunbar watches a moment to see if he's done any good, then
turns forward with a sour look.
Dunbar makes his way through a small, grassy valley borders
by rolling slopes. He looks across the prairie. Two Socks is
about fifty yards out, trotting parallel to Cisco and Dunbar.
Exasperated Dunbar pulls Cisco up and slides off. Two Socks
sits, waiting and watching.
Far down in the valley the figure of Lieutenant Dunbar is
striding through the grass. He looks angry. When he's within
a few feet of Two Socks, Dunbar waves his arms and stamps a
foot Two Socks scurries to one side but doesn't go far.
Dunbar repeats his shooing motion and the wolf hops a few
feet.
Dunbar turns away and as he does a long, low and mournful
howl swells behind him. He looks back. Two Socks muzzle is
high in the air and one eye is trained on Dunbar hoping for
a good reaction.
Like an angry father who's had too much, Dunbar charges Two
Sock with a roar.
The wolf races away this time and Dunbar immediately runs
for Cisco, hoping to reach his horse and ditch Two Socks.
But he's running long before the wolf comes bouncing
alongside. Dunbar weaves out at him, startling Two Socks. He
sidles away but as he does the lieutenant reaches out and
gives the base of his tail a good hard squeeze.
It might as well be a firecracker. Tow Socks gives a yelp
and shoots off with his tail tucked. Dunbar laughs out loud.
He watches until the wolf has gone a fair distance without
sign of slowing down.
Then still chuckling to himself, he turns once again and
starts for Cisco at a trot. But moments later, something
grabs at one of his ankles, the lieutenant's legs tangle and
he goes down face first into the grass.
Dunbar's lying on his belly. Not knowing what hit him, he
rolls onto his side for a closer look. There's Two Socks,
sitting in the grass a few feet back. Dunbar sits up cross-
legged and smiles at his old friend.
Two Socks catches something suddenly, perhaps from a shift
in the wind, and starts to slink away. Dunbar peers over the
grass up at the bluff. It's Stone Calf, Kicking Bird and
Wind In His Hair.
The Indian entourage is riding slowly toward Lieutenant
Dunbar. Stone Calf is at Kicking Bird's side.
Kicking Bird watches Dunbar as he replies.
Lieutenant Dunbar's arrival this day is different from the
ones which have gone before.
Young mounted warriors have ridden out to swarm around him,
but they're full of good cheer reserved for a special friend.
There's much backslapping and a few of them lean in to shake
hands as they have seen him do.
But some of the men have chosen to remain in front of their
lodges. Their expressionless faces anything but friendly.
None of this is lost on Wind In His Hair. He has the look of
a secret service man watching a president, as the parade
moves through the village.
The escorts dismount and so does the lieutenant. Smiles A
Lot suddenly comes forward and grasps Cisco's reins. There's
a brief tug of war. But before it gets out of hand, Kicking
Bird is reassuring Dunbar with calm words and a smile, with
the lieutenant watching, the boy takes Cisco's muzzle between
his hands and blows breath into each nostril. He too gives
Dunbar a reassuring smile.
In the next moment, the lieutenant finds himself being gently
pushed into Kicking Bird's lodge.
As Kicking Bird is about to duck in behind him, a hand on
his arm stops him. It is Wind In His Hair and his tone is
strong with friendly advice.
Wind In His Hair turns to the people that have gathered about.
Kicking Bird's pipe is a beautiful piece of work. It's being
smoked.
Kicking Bird puffs away a few times and hands the pipe to
Dunbar. The lieutenant, aware that the pipe is something
special, handles it with care.
He looks to Kicking Bird for guidance as he puts his mouth
to the tip. The medicine man reassures him with a wave of
the hand and Dunbar begins to puff.
Dunbar coughs lightly at the harsh tobacco but he smokes
well, watching the bowl pulse with life at each puff.
He stops now and lowers the pipe. He stares down. The pipe
seems almost alive as it lays in his hands.
Dunbar hands the pipe back, and as Kicking Bird takes it he
hears the light tinkling of bells.
Dunbar hears it too. As he looks toward the sound, a shadow
falls across the arbor's entrance.
Stands With A Fist ducks through the arbor's entrance and
seats herself between Dunbar and Kicking Bird.
Stands With A Fist is wearing a band of bells around one
ankle. She has a pair of simple but pretty moccasins on her
feet. Her dress is old but well-cared for. Animal teeth are
sewn along her bodice. On her wrist is a solid brass bracelet.
Her hair is tied back loosely with a bret, accenting the
feminine in her face.
Her whiteness seems to show more than ever. But it is not
dominant. The Sioux is dominant.
Kicking Bird looks to Stands With A Fist. She takes her time
and the words are accented but they are close enough.
The words are sweet music to the lieutenant. He replies with
a feeling of great relief.
Dunbar jumps in. There are things he wants to know, has waited
a long time to know.
The medicine man nods agreeably. He smiles at Dunbar, quite
right, introductions should come first.
She kicks at the ground with the toe of her moccasin. Dunbar
doesn't get it. She kicks a little harder.
Stands With A Fist has the word but it takes a few seconds
to make it come out of her mouth.
A brief silence. Kicking Bird seems ready to speak but Dunbar
is too quick.
She thinks. It's hard. She smiles thinly.
An idea comes to her. She stands up quickly.
She repeats the movement again.
Her smile is a little wider this time.
Dunbar starts to speak but she cuts him off.
She draw something in the dirt. It's an "A".
Now she makes a fist and holds it close to Dunbar's face.
She nods.
Kicking Bird and Dunbar are strolling through camp engaged
in a real conversation, Stands With A Fist is just behind
them.
Kicking Bird and Stands With A Fist are walking away from
Dunbar, who takes a few steps in the opposite direction before
pausing. Toward the end of the following speech he glances
back at them and Stands With A Fist glances back at him.
His surroundings are completely Indian, Dunbar is cleaning
the big navy revolver.
The lodge flap rustles and in comes Stands With A Fist and
Kicking Bird. Dunbar stands to greet them.
Kicking Bird speaks and Stands With A Fist translates.
She translates this to Kicking Bird. The medicine man
hesitates then speaks once more.
Dunbar looks to Kicking Bird then to Stands With A Fist unable
to mask his disappointment.
Dunbar thinks a moment longer and speaks directly to Kicking
Bird.
He thinks and remembers the night with Two Socks.
The medicine man smiles.
Black Shawl is hurrying out of the lodge with her husband's
bow and arrows.
A war party of twenty warriors is mounted and everyone except
sleeping children is out to say goodbye.
Stands With A Fist is helping to load Kicking Bird's horse
with last minute preparations. Out of the tipi comes Kicking
Bird's eldest child. He is sleepy but almost on the verge of
tears as he knows what is happening.
Kicking Bird picks up the boy. What is said is between father
and son. And it is just a look.
He hands the child to Stands With A Fist, and pauses to speak
with his wife. She comes close to tears but there will be no
crying. None from Kicking Bird either. He steps back to his
horse.
Dances With Wolves is standing alone in front of his lodge.
Wind In His Hair is riding past. He reaches down and shakes
Dances With Wolves' hand. The big warrior smiles.
Dances With Wolves watches the warriors go by, but his eyes
begin to wander. He's looking for someone among the faces of
the women. Who ever it is, he can't find her.
Dances With Wolves sits alone in the arbor. He's fidgety.
Now he hears a light tinkling of bells, the sounds he's been
waiting to hear.
Her feet appear in the doorway.
Dances with Wolves and Stands With A Fist are walking through
the village, talking and pointing things out to each other.
Stands With A Fist chuckles but politely checks herself.
She smiles and tries again.
He really wants to get one right on the first try. His brows
come together as he concentrates.
He listens hard.
Dances With Wolves thinks some more. When he speaks it is
with quiet confidence.
Dances With Wolves' eyes get big. He leans forward for
emphasis his whole face lit with the joy of having the right
answer.
Stands With A Fist doubles up and falls onto her side,
laughing all the way.
Stands With A Fist doesn't really hear. She's rocking back
and forth on the floor of the arbor, laughing so hard that
her eyes are tearing.
Her laughter subsides to an occasional chuckle but Dances
With Wolves is quiet. He gazes at her face.
Stands With A Fist hesitates in her answer, meeting his gaze.
A little boy pokes his head in.
The moment is broken. Stands With A Fist brings herself to
respond.
This makes so much sense to the little boy that he trots in
and flings himself on Stands With a Fist's lap. Then a squirm
or two.
Stands With A Fist leads the little boy off to a lodge. Dances
With Wolves watches her walk away. From out of nowhere, Smiles
A Lot appears. He's been milling about the arbor
eavesdropping, and looks over to Dunbar with a teasing smile.
Black Shawl is settling the youngest children in for bed,
Stands With A Fist is playing with the oldest of the children.
They're setting up a child's tipi.
Stands With A Fist stares straight ahead as if she were
wondering the same thing. Which she was.
Case closed, she goes back to playing and Black Shawl
continues putting the kids to bed.
She looks again at Stands With A Fist wondering "what did
you think I meant?"
Dunbar is sitting on Cisco. It's plain he's been waiting for
someone.
Stands With A Fist pulls aside the lodge flap, she's lugging
a couple water bags.
His Sioux is perfect, and she smiles.
Cisco makes his way down the river trail, he shies at the
flurry of wings as a covey of quail fly up before them. Stands
With A Fist tightens her grip around Dances With Wolves waist.
Stands With A Fist draws water into a set of bladder bags.
Dances With Wolves squats next to her, staring at the eddying
stream.
Stands With A Fist smiles to herself as she fills up the
last of the bags.
She lugs the filled bags onto shore and sits next to Dances
With Wolves.
A little silence.
He taps his jaw. She makes a fist and brushes very gently at
the point of his jaw. Dances With Wolves' eyes flutter. They
roll up in his head and he keels over backward... out cold.
She goes with the joke. Bending over him she slaps lightly
at each side of his cheeks, until Dances With Wolves revives.
He sits up, rubbing his jaw.
Neither one acknowledges the joke and, a sudden awkwardness
falls between them. Stands With A Fist fiddles shyly with
the ties on the water bags while Dances With Wolves draws
lines in the earth with a stick.
Finally he works up the courage to ask a delicate question.
The question comes as a jolt to Stands With A Fist. She stops
her fiddling. A visible stiffness overtakes her. She quickly
stands up.
Dances With Wolves doesn't know what to do. He only knows
that he should not have asked the question. She slings the
heavy bags over her shoulders and starts back up the path.
Dances With Wolves jumps to his feet.
But the words are delivered to her back. She is already
hurrying up the path with her heavy load.
Five ponies have wondered into the middle of the path. She
kicks violently at the nearest innocent bystander. The horses
shy out of the way.
He's left alone at the waters edge, frustrated and confused.
He watches her go for a moment. Then he lets the stick drop
from his hand. He stares at it for a second then gives it a
vicious little kick.
Stands With A Fist is sitting in the middle of the lodge,
she starts when Black Shawl walks in.
Black Shawl gives her a deeper look, then lets it go.
The sun is setting and the village is settling in for the
evening.
Lying on his bed, Dances With Wolves looks sleepy as he stares-
across at the small fire. Even, in his drowsiness, it is
easy to see he's concentrating... in this case on a certain
someone.
Again, Dances With Wolves is waiting. This time, not so
patiently. He gives up and leaves in search of something.
Dances With Wolves is wandering through the village, half-
heartedly looking for Stands With A Fist. The day is very
hot and the village is quiet. Most of the people have gone
to shade.
He sees Stone Calf sitting in the shade behind a lodge. A
newly made shield hangs from a tripod and he is painting a
design on it.
Dances With Wolves sits in the shade with Stone Calf, watching
the older man paint.
Dances With Wolves is a little taken aback. The elder has
read his mind. He decides to speak it.
For the first time, Stone Calf leaves his work. He gives his
visitor a quick and penetrating look. Then he goes back to
his shield.
Stone Calf considers before he speaks. It is not something
he wants to get into.
The blood has gone out of Dances With Wolves' face. He tries
to digest this.
Stands With A Fist kneels before Black Shawl, the older woman
is combing out the tangles in her hair. Black Shawl senses a
tension in the girl and gently tries to pry it out of her.
Stands With A Fist stiffens a bit.
Stands With A Fist is quiet.
Stands With A Fist bolts up, racing to the lodge flap -- she
pulls it aside and is stunned by the sight of Dances With
Wolves' abandoned lodge -- Cisco is nowhere to be seen.
She turns away, tears coming to her eyes. Black Shawl is
beside her watching -- the girl's emotions have betrayed
her.
Black Shawl takes the crying girl into her arms. A child
runs into the lodge but Black Shawl indicates "not now."
The message is clearly understood, and the child digs in his
heels and heads the other way.
The breeze is up and the remaining shreds of canvas that
were once the awning are flying like tattered flags.
Leading Cisco, Dances With Wolves walks into view. It will
be his last visit to his old home and he is taking his time.
He watches the blowing canvas. The sound of it snapping is
all that can be heard.
He steps over to the supply house. He starts to peer in, but
when he places a hand against the sod, part of the wall gives
way.
Part of the old bed has collapsed but some of it is still
strong enough for support and here Dances With Wolves is
sitting as he leafs through his beloved journal.
He reads a little entry here and there, sometimes smiling at
the memory.
A few blank pages remain at the back of the book. Reaching
these he closes the journal and holds it on his lap, letting
his mind run for a moment.
Now he notices the old pen and ink. He picks them up and
opens the journal for one last entry.
He writes: "I love Stands With A Fist" and signs himself
"Dances With Wolves."
Something is moving outside and Dunbar stops, drawing his
gun out. He drops the book on the bed and carefully moves
outside.
Lying in the sun a few feet away is Two Socks. He looks up
hopefully at Dances With Wolves. The two partners stare at
each other for a moment.
Then Dances With Wolves reaches into a little day pouch at
his side and pulls out a strip of jerky. He squats close to
the ground and offers the meat to the wolf.
Two Socks is up now. He takes several tentative steps. His
nose sniffs at the meat and he opens his mouth. Teeth and
fingers touch as the wolf takes the meat delicately.
Now, in his customary style, he moves away, heading out onto
the prairie with his prize.
Dances With Wolves watches a moment longer. Then he vaults
onto Cisco's back and they canter off in the direction of
the village.
Stands With A Fist is wading through the water, her mind is
far away.
In a moment there is a shift in the wind. The rustling of
the trees alerts her to a presence she had not thought to
feel before.
Gradually, she raises her eyes to see the figure of a man
moving through the trees... Dances With Wolves.
Stands With A Fist walks slowly out of the water. He opens
his arms and she melts into them, letting her head rest
against his chest.
She presses her body full against his, feeling all of him.
She climbs higher into his arms for a moment. Then, supporting
each other, the lovers move into the cover of the willow
breaks along the river.
The path leading to the river is deserted.
Suddenly, a couple steps out of the cover of the willows
alongside the path. Stands With A Fist and Dances With Wolves
look up and down the path. They start for the village, holding
hands.
As they near the top of the trail their hands part. A few
steps later and someone calls from the bushes startling Dances
with Wolves.
Smiles A Lot, Worm and Otter are sitting pathside. Worm is
holding a sack.
Smiles A Lot looks to Stands With A Fist.
Worm opens the sack. A large, wriggling snake lies in the
bottom.
The two parties split up and everyone says goodbye to Stands
With A Fist. She makes her way up to the village.
Dances With Wolves watches her go. Turning back to head down
to the river, he is greeted by the open hissing mouth of
Worm's snake.
Worm and Otter laugh and race off down the path.
Smiles A Lot and Dances With Wolves follow, Dances With Wolves
a little ahead. Something on his back, something curious,
has captured Smiles A Lot's attention.
There's a strange coating of fuzz on Dances With Wolves'
back.
Something occurs to Smiles A Lot. He stops and turns, his
eyes going up the trail.
Stands With A Fist is walking toward the village, it's there
on her back too... cattail fuzz.
Smiles A Lot laughs and runs to catch Dances With Wolves.
The boy slaps Dunbar with a knowing pat and a big grin.
Dances with Wolves sits at his cozy fire, working on a pipe.
He follows a low rumble of thunder as it rolls overhead.
Thunder booms again and suddenly Stands With A Fist comes
through the lodge flap.
Dances With Wolves comes to his feet. They stare across at
each other. Dances With Wolves walks slowly to her and they
embrace lightly. Stands With A Fist starts to slip out of
her dress.
Indian riders are coming into camp. There are three or four
of them. One man is slung over a pony's back. He's dead. All
of the others are wounded.
Dances With Wolves and Stands With A Fist are having sex.
The sounds of their love-making are suddenly joined by more
insistent sounds from outside. Urgent yelling.
The lovers freeze. Stands With A Fist props herself on an
elbow, listening.
Dances With Wolves hurries through a light rain to the scene
of a commotion going on at Ten Bears' lodge. There's a real
sense of panic in the air by the time he reaches the fire
outside Ten Bears' lodge.
It's a wild scene. Ten Bears is trying to huddle with his
advisors, the wounded men are trying to tend their injuries
and the rest of the warriors in camp are holding little skull
sessions amidst much shouting. Women are running to and fro,
rounding up their children.
Dances With Wolves spots Stands With A Fist making her way
toward him. Her eyes are big with terror.
Stone Calf is just passing by. Dances With Wolves stops him.
The older man doesn't mince words.
Dances With Wolves nods.
She rushes off and Dances With Wolves falls into step behind
Stone Calf. He hasn't gone two steps before a revelation
hits him.
The older warrior faces him.
Amid the pandemonium of the village, Dances With Wolves and
Ten Bears are talking. Stone Calf stands at Ten Bears' side,
listening.
The idea intrigues Ten Bears. As he thinks, he looks to Stone
Calf. But the elder warrior says nothing.
Dances With Wolves turns away now, hoping to make a quick
choice. But in their excitement all the warriors are busy
running to and fro. Only one person is standing resolutely.
He is staring straight at Dances With Wolves. It is Smiles A
Lot, and from the look on his face it's easy to see that he
wants to be chosen.
Dances With Wolves returns the boy's stare, trying to make
up his mind. He turns to Ten Bears.
Ten Bears looks briefly at Smiles A Lot. He too can see
resolve in the boy's face. Now he looks once again at Dances
With Wolves. He nods.
Rain is pouring now. Thunder is still booming. A great fork
of lightning illuminates the ruins of the old fort. And
nearby, it reveals two riders out in the grass.
Dances With Wolves and Smiles A Lot have brought a couple
extra horses with travois, but is is dark and in the rain
they've been reduced to looking for a needle in a haystack.
Dances With Wolves' face is grim with frustration as it covers
the ground at Cisco's feet.
Smiles A Lot and his pony are walking the soggy ground. Over
the tumult of the storm there is the faint but distinct sound
of a "snap".
He's staring curiously at the ground beneath his pony's feet.
Smiles a Lot jumps off and, going on all fours, he paws over
the ground.
His hand grasps something and he holds it up to his face.
It's a sliver of bone shattered at one end. Quickly he gropes
some more and finds the other half. Together they are a
buffalo rib.
Frenzied hands claw away mud and sod. Something wooden is
uncovered; the lid of a rifle crate.
The sky is still full of thunder and lightning but in the
breaking dawn the storm can be seen to be lifting.
The village is just ahead down a long slope as the gun finders
come into view.
A great bolt of lightning hits just as Dances With Wolves
starts down the slope. He sees something.
Smiles A Lot stops. Dances With Wolves squints into the feeble
light. He can see the outline of the village below, but
upriver the light is still too murky to make anything out.
Another bolt of lightning flashes. There they are. A long
line of horsemen crossing river a mile or so upstream from
the village. The Pawnee.
In front of Ten Bears' lodge, Dances With Wolves is passing
out the last of the rifles. Warriors are grabbing handfuls
of bullets out of an open ammo box.
Ten Bears is watching this procedure. And while he watches,
he thinks.
The guns have been passed out and, except for a slight murmur
among the warriors, it's strangely quiet. The band's best
fighters are gone and many men don't know what to do next.
They're looking to Ten Bears for leadership.
But the old man is looking at Dances With Wolves. He holds
up a hand for quiet.
Everyone is waiting.
The warriors send up a chorus of derisive cries but Ten Bears
angrily quiets them.
Ten Bears smiles.
Two of the camp dogs are lapping water at the river's edge,
behind them lies the quiet village. Suddenly both heads jerk
up.
Dances With Wolves steps into the lodge, followed by Smiles
A Lot. They both have rifles and Dances With Wolves' old
long-barreled revolver is holstered at his waist.
Before him is a quiet, tense scene.
The women are huddled together on a single sleeping platform.
Kicking Bird's three children nestled between them. Two of
the kids are crying softly.
Black Shawl grips a hatchet and Stands With A Fist has a
rifle. They will both fight. But they are both scared.
Everyone in the village has a life at stake. In one glimpse,
Dances With Wolves understands what he will be fighting for.
He looks once more at the women and children and ducks out
of the lodge.
The feet of the enemy are moving past the dogs, whose bodies
are still and riddled with arrows. In front of them the river
is full of Pawnee crossing over toward the village. There is
no sound.
It has stopped raining but the ground is still soaked and an
early morning fog is swirling through the camp. Clumped in
groups of five or six, behind the lodges nearest the river,
are Sioux warriors with rifles. They're absolutely quiet as
they wait for the enemy.
Dances With Wolves looks across a clearing that slopes down
to the breaks fronting the river. Nothing.
Wait. A movement. And another. Another. The heads of men
lurking in the fog. He glances at the defenders.
Most of the warriors are huddled behind the line of lodges
watching him. Ten Bears raises a hand.
The Pawnee are visible now, a war party at its fiercest,
painted and feathered and armed to the teeth.
Coming on foot, the first of them have reached the edge of
the clearing. They start into a stealthy trot, more and more
of them breaking into a run.
A Pawnee war cry goes up and, as the others join in. Ten
Bears lowers his hand.
In ragged formation, the Sioux pour from behind the lodges
and thirty rifles fire into the vanguard of the Pawnee charge.
The smoke of many rifles mixes with the ground fog as the
Sioux run screaming down on the Pawnee. Dances With Wolves
screams too as he runs flat out down the slope.
A Pawnee warrior suddenly looms out of the smoke and they
crash together violently.
The two fighters tumble over the ground, each grappling for
an advantage. The hand to hand fighting all around them is
furious and, shrouded in smoke and fog, it has a surreal
quality.
Dances With Wolves works the Navy revolver from its holster
and shoots the Pawnee in the face.
A child sticks his head out from under the edge of the lodge.
Momentarily he is jerked back into the lodge out of sight.
Now there's a ripping at the lodge entrance. The flap is
being torn away. Black Shawl is desperately pulling the child
back from the edge of the lodge.
Suddenly, there he is... a Pawnee warrior. But now it's his
turn to be surprised. He sees Stands with A Fist taking aim,
and it's too late. She fires the rifle and the Pawnee explodes
back out of the lodge.
Through the smoke, Dances With Wolves can just catch a glimpse
of Ten Bears. He is moving through the village at a trot,
loading his gun.
He spots a Sioux warrior grappling with a Pawnee, sights and
shoots the Pawnee point blank. He trots off, reloading once
more.
Dances With Wolves is bumped from behind and is knocked to
his knees. It's a frantic Pawnee war horse, loose on the
battlefield. Dances With Wolves grabs a hunk of mane and
swings onto his back.
He has a real view now. The Pawnee are taking a terrible
licking. Already they are being beaten back to the river.
A turbaned enemy is falling back to the river, firing arrows
as he goes. Dances With Wolves goes after him.
Still clutching his hatchet, a wounded Pawnee half staggers
toward Ten Bears' lodge. He is bleeding profusely and in a
very bad mood. He reaches the closed lodge flap.
Pretty Shield stands in front of a group of children, ready
to defend them.
The Pawnee is inside now. He has a wild desperate look and
in a moment his hatchet will be flailing its way through
these people.
But he never takes a step. Instead he suddenly sinks to his
knees and we see another arrow join the one that is already
buried in his back. The warrior keels over and Pretty Shield
looks through the open flap to see the grinning face of Stone
Calf.
Without hesitation, Pretty Shield snatches a half-burned log
from the fire and finishes the Pawnee.
The children watch, their faces a mixture of horror and
intrigue.
Coming off the pony like a rodeo bulldogger, Dances With
Wolves crashes through the river taking the Pawnee in a
headlock.
Somehow they both keep their feet and hurtle down the hill
at a weird run. A small cottonwood stops their momentum, the
Pawnee taking most of the blow.
Dances With Wolves grabs either side of the man's head and
starts banging his skull against the tree trunk. Shortly, he
notices that the man's eyes are dead.
The Pawnee was impaled on impact by the stub of a broken
branch low on the trunk.
Dances With Wolves shrinks back from this gruesome sight and
staggers toward the village.
Stone Calf, his bow and arrow at the ready, is looking for
more enemies to kill.
Suddenly from the corner of his eye the old man senses an
attack. But he is too late. A Pawnee war club crushes his
skull and the old man collapses.
Now we can see his attacker. It is the fierce Pawnee warrior
who killed Timmons the wagon driver. He glowers down at the
body of Stone Calf and swings his club toward the old man's
head once again.
Dances With Wolves squints toward the village just in time
to see the Toughest take another shot at the prostrate, white-
headed form of Stone Calf.
Dances With Wolves begins to run.
The Toughest has his knife to Stone Calf's forehead and is
preparing to scalp his victim when something strikes him in
the lower leg.
He looks down to find a small arrow imbedded in his calf. He
looks up to see three boys, Otter, Worm, and Smiles A Lot,
huddled at the edge of the battlefield.
He turns back to finish the job when another arrow hits him.
Enraged he breaks off the arrow, leaps onto a horse and
charges the kids.
Their faces go ashen as the Toughest bears down on them.
Otter's arrow flies weakly into the air. The boys turn and
run for their lives.
The Toughest would catch them with ease but now, he sees
half a dozen howling Sioux warriors angling in to cut him
off. He knows in a glance that the fight has been lost. He
also knows that he can still escape if he changes direction.
He veers for the river.
The Sioux are distraught. The Toughest will get away.
But wait, Dances with Wolves is at full speed now. He is
streaking across the battlefield.
Suddenly, the Pawnee himself is hurtling through space, driven
there by the full force impact of Dances With Wolves' shoulder
which has caught him rib high.
Both men hit the ground grappling and rolling.
A knife flashes in the Toughest's hand and Dances With Wolves
can only react quick enough to keep the knife from a vital
spot. As it is, the blade lays open a huge gash on his arm.
They square off. The Toughest knows the advantage is his. He
smiles grimly at Dances With Wolves and grunts sadistically.
But the sound from his throat is cut short by the simultaneous
arrival of five Sioux arrows. Before the Pawnee can fall,
six Sioux warriors are on him tearing him to pieces.
Dances With Wolves climbs to his feet and discovers that the
battlefield is no longer so. The fighting has stopped.
It's a scene of carnage and joy. The Pawnee attackers lay
where they fell.
The Sioux victors are in high spirits as they hop around
finishing off the wounded and counting coup on the dead.
Dances With Wolves looks down at himself. His body is streaked
with blood, much of it his own. His arm is bleeding freely
but he is too repulsed to move forward and too exhausted to
retreat into the breaks.
Dances With Wolves now looks up to see the lifeless body of
Stone Calf. Ten Bears is hugging him. Pretty Shield starts
to kneel beside her mourning husband.
Before he knows it, Sioux fighters are moving all around
him, chanting his name. Like ants rolling a pebble up a hill,
they push him into the middle of the battlefield. In a daze
he allows himself to be carried along.
When he looks up again he can see women and children emerging
from the lodges.
Dances With Wolves looks down and recognizes the face of a
man he has just killed. Several warriors are crowding around
him now. Dances With Wolves points at the body.
As the sun breaks fully through the clouds, the little knot
of warriors, Dances With Wolves in their midst, continues
its triumphant tour of the battleground. The men are hugging
and slapping each other on the back.
The war party with Kicking Bird and Wind In His Hair at its
head has halted in the middle of nowhere. The Sioux riders
are coming toward them at a run. They pull up, excited with
what they have to tell.
The returning war party and the two riders who met them start
ahead at a gallop.
Black Shawl and Stands With A Fist are clearing things away.
The medicine man has hosted a dinner party which is now
winding down.
Wind In His Hair is there, Dances With Wolves and several
other prominent warriors. It's purely social and all the men
are enjoying themselves.
Dances With Wolves sneaks a look of affection at Stands With
A Fist, and she returns it.
Then, with more theatricality than is really necessary, he
stretches his arms and yawns. Wind In His Hair looks at his
friend with surprise.
Dances With Wolves gets to his feet.
He slips out. In a few seconds, the men have pick up another
topic to jawbone.
They pay no attention to Stands With A Fist's momentary exit,
But Black Shawl does, it doesn't bother her, but she notices.
The medicine man's wife is already in bed as he slips under
the covers with a grunt.
Kicking Bird gives his wife an odd look.
Kicking Bird rises on his elbows.
Kicking Bird stares wearily across the floor.
A brief silence.
Kicking Bird glances up frustrated with himself.
Stands With A Fist is walking through the village with Kicking
Bird's youngest child. They're both carrying armloads of
firewood.
Here comes Kicking Bird. He's out of breath.
Kicking Bird turns abruptly and stalks off, leaving Stands
With A Fist to ponder the meaning of his curt announcement.
A smile gradually works onto her face.
Dances With Wolves sits waiting as a voice comes to him from
the outside.
Wind In His Hair's face pokes through the entrance. He steps
inside, followed by Smiles A Lot.
Wind In His Hair and Smiles A Lot share a smile.
Wind In His Hair isn't really listening. He glances around
the lodge curiously.
Smiles A Lot whispers in the warrior's ear.
Wind In His Hair looks around at the sparse furnishing.
A long silence. Dances With Wolves looks around his lodge.
Wind In His Hair is right. He really has nothing.
Smiles A Lot is on the hot seat. He looks to Wind In His
Hair, but no luck -- he's on his own.
Wind In His Hair and Smiles A Lot leave.
Wind In His Hair and Smiles A Lot are greeted by seven
chuckling warriors. They've been listening to the exchange
and move off with the two "helpers".
Dances With Wolves is inspecting several new ponies which
are tied outside his tipi. Now he notices an old couple
approaching.
The old couple leaves a gift along with others that have
already been brought. The old folks are shy and so is Dances
With Wolves. They glance at one another and smile but do not
speak.
Dances With Wolves ties the last of the ponies in front of
Kicking Bird's lodge and starts back toward his own home.
Dances With Wolves looks over his shoulder at the standing
ponies then he continues on.
Dances With Wolves tosses and turns in his bed. He slips out
of the covers and ducks his head through the lodge flap,
checking again on the ponies.
The ponies are gone.
Dances With Wolves' hair is shiny. His breastplate gleams,
the officer's pants have been dusted and his old boots have
something resembling a shine. The groom is ready.
Dances With Wolves does a three-sixty.
A brief silence as Wind In His Hair contemplates something
he wants to say.
The sound of music and people outside distracts both men.
Kicking Bird is leading the wedding party. Stands With A
Fist by his side. She glows with the special beauty of a
bride.
Many people are standing about quietly, more like simple
observers than participants. The whole village is as peaceful
as we will ever see it.
Kicking Bird steps forward, his wife and Stands With A Fist
following in his footsteps.
Shyly, she holds out a slender, graceful hand. Dances with
Wolves meets it with one of his own.
The medicine man looks Dances With Wolves in the eyes for
several seconds.
Dances With Wolves also begins to speak... internally. At
first the volume of his voice and that of the medicine man
are nearly equal, but Kicking Bird's voice quickly begins to
fade.
The medicine man's voice cuts back in. He's had to say it
twice.
The newlyweds disappear into their new home. The flap is
dropped and there it stays. The light begins to change,
growing darker, the wind comes up, blowing leaves against
the door. In the distance there is thunder.
The lodge flap is still closed. But now it is covered in
sunshine.
Smiles A Lot, Worm and Otter are just across the way, bundled
now against the chill of oncoming winter. They're watching
too. Smiles A Lot is standing next to Worm, -- Otter is on
his haunches. Both are gnawing at a breakfast of dried meat
as they talk nonchalantly.
The two older boys look down at Otter.
A silence as the boys watch smoke curl out of the lodge.
Worm laughs to himself.
The boys look at each other for the first time, their eyes
brightening. What a great idea!
The two boys are stalking toward Dances With Wolves' lodge
when they see something that makes them peel off in another
direction.
It's Kicking Bird, coming to call.
In a moment the lodge flap opens and Dances With Wolves steps
outside. He's fully dressed but a little disheveled.
Dances With Wolves ponders this.
Kicking Bird and Dances With Wolves are cantering side by
side across the open prairie.
They pull their horses to a walk and Kicking Bird glances
Dances With Wolves' direction.
Dances With Wolves' glances back and smiles.
The medicine man keeps looking at his protege. There is
virtually no semblance of Lieutenant Dunbar left.
Dances With Wolves doesn't reply, but he is blushing a little.
Dances With Wolves and Kicking Bird gallop their horses to
the crest of a steep hill and rein to a halt.
Down below, miles distant, is the curving line of a river.
But there is a section of river, directly before them, that
cannot be seen. It is screened by a mammoth stand of trees,
some of them towering a hundred feet or more.
He glances at Dances With Wolves but his companion doesn't
see. He's staring in wonder at the great forest before him.
They start toward the river at a walk.
The two riders come out of the sunlight and onto a shaded
path leading into the forest. They've only gone a few yards
when Kicking Bird pulls to a stop. The men sit on their horses
in complete silence. Dances With Wolves is still fully
entranced.
But Kicking Bird does not acknowledge his companion's words.
He seems to be concentrating on the quiet. The quiet is wrong
and Kicking Bird knows it. He moves forward slowly.
Following behind Kicking Bird, Dances With Wolves' attention
is focused on the tree tops above him. A curious buzzing
sound has started up and is growing louder by the moment.
Perhaps there are bees swarming in the branches overhead.
Now he is distracted by Cisco coming to a stop. Kicking Bird
too has stopped. Just ahead the forest opens into an
incredible cathedral-like expanse. Sunlight streams down
onto the floor in beautiful pools.
But still there is a deathly quiet and Dances With Wolves
can see now that this remarkable place has been horribly
desecrated.
Trees have been felled everywhere, most of them left to rot
for no explicable reason.
At the same time he sees this destruction Dances With Wolves
realizes that the strange buzzing sound is not coming from
overhead but from the forest floor.
The insects are not bees. They are flies and they are swarming
over dozens of carcasses strewn over the ground. Badgers,
skunks, squirrels and other small animals, nearly all of
them killed merely for target practice.
The men and their ponies move on. Deer carcasses are
everywhere, many of them horribly mutilated. A choice flank
portion is cut away here and there, while ninety-five percent
of the bodies have been left to rot.
Heads and legs have been chopped off. Dances With Wolves
passes by a spot where several deer heads have been placed
nose to nose as if the heads were having a conversation.
Someone's perverted idea of humor.
The men ride through the carnage in a sad daze.
Now they reach the center of the cathedral and here they
find a few crude leantos, hewn from freshly cut wood. The
people who stayed here had bigger plans for all the felled
wood, but lost ambition and settled for these ugly hovels.
A great pile of wild turkeys, perhaps twenty birds in all,
sit to one side. They haven't even been plucked. Just shot
and left to rot.
Dances With Wolves notices half a dozen liquor bottles in a
heap of trash.
He cannot bring himself to look at Kicking Bird. Any man
would be repulsed at these sights, but in Dances With Wolves'
case there is a feeling of shame as well.
Kicking Bird says nothing for a long time.
He turns his pony away.
Kicking Bird and Dances With Wolves are alone on a great sea
of prairie.
There's a little fire going. A sage hen is being roasted,
but for some time we hear nothing but the light crackle of
the fire. Each man is preoccupied with his own thoughts,
thoughts of the broken forest.
Dances With Wolves looks at his friend and mentor.
This is what Kicking Bird wanted to know. And it hits him
like a rock.
Kicking Bird bows his head in thought while Dances With Wolves
raises his. He never wanted to say this, he wishes it wasn't
true.
The old man puffs away at his trusty pipe. Now he lays it
down. Kicking Bird and Dances With Wolves are waiting
patiently.
The old man gets up, walks to his bedside, reaches up into
the sacred rigging above an takes down a melon-sized rawhide
bundle. He brings this back to the fire and unwraps it slowly.
Inside is a rusted hunk of metal, the helmet of a Spanish
conquistador.
He picks up his pipe and puffs deeply.
The whole camp is being struck. There is activity everywhere.
Stands With A Fist is packing and so is Dances With Wolves.
He is putting away the shield that Stone Calf once worked
on. She pauses to stroke her husband's leg tenderly.
Stands with A Fist laughs as she starts out of the lodge.
But as he tightens the leather thongs on the shield case,
Dances With Wolves' face begins to cloud.
Dances With Wolves bolts out of the lodge and snatches up
Cisco's reins. He calls urgently to Stands with A Fist.
The village is about ready to move, just a few last minute
flurries of activity.
Dances With Wolves and Cisco are cantering quickly over the
open prairie.
Old Fort Sedgewick is just beyond the next rise. Dances With
Wolves eases Cisco into a full run.
They fly so quickly over the rise that Dances With Wolves
has no time to react.
There must be forty or fifty of them; talking, walking,
working and playing. Old Fort Sedgewick is crawling with
them. Blue-coated soldiers.
Just in front of him is a deep-bedded wagon carrying a cargo
of SOLDIERS. They've been out cutting wood. But now the men
in the wagon are scrambling for their rifles and screaming
out the alarm... "Indians!"
Dances With Wolves puts everything he has into pulling Cisco
up.
The soldiers in the wagon, a collection of pimply-faced teen-
agers and middle-aged rabble, are aiming their rifles. Cisco
rears high in the air as the volley is fired from the wagon.
Dances With Wolves is pitched off to one side, landing hard
on the ground. When he gets his senses back the first thing
he sees is Cisco. The buckskin is lying very still.
Oblivious to the shouts of the soldiers racing toward him,
Dances With Wolves runs crab-like to his horse's side.
Cisco's been shot several times, one bullet taking him in
the heart. He's dead.
Dances With Wolves whirls to face the soldiers.
That's the last thing he says. A rifle stock slams into the
side of his face and as soldiers swarm over him, everything
goes black.
Ten Bears village is on the trail. Kicking Bird is riding
down the line. He notices Stands With A Fist. She is terribly
distraught.
Kicking Bird glances at the sun. The day is more than half-
over. He kicks his pony back up the line next to Wind In His
Hair.
Dances With Wolves lies unconscious on the floor of the ruined
supply house. One side of his face is grotesquely swollen
from the blow he took. Blood still seeps from a long split
of the skin along his cheek.
He groans. Voice are playing about his ears, the voices of
white men. He opens his eyes.
A bearish, bearded SERGEANT BAUER, is squatting directly in
front of him. Behind the sergeant, peering over the crumbled
walls like visitors at a zoo, are a crowd of ordinary
soldiers.
A pitiful looking man, SPIVEY, who is a soldier by name only,
answers up.
The sergeant's smallish eyes are fixed on Dances With Wolves.
With some effort he manages to get himself into a sitting
position against the back wall.
Dances With Wolves only blinks at him. His cheek is crushed
and so is his spirit.
Someone calls attention and two officers walk into the
roofless supply house. One is a MAJOR, one is a young
lieutenant -- Lieutenant Elgin -- the officer Dances With
Wolves bumped into at Fort Hays. Neither one recognizes the
other.
Everyone is shocked at the clarity of the words.
The major and the lieutenant exchange whispers.
Spivey shifts uncomfortably.
Elgin indicates to the major that he will get to the bottom
of this and walks out the door -- the major follows.
Dances With Wolves lets his head slump forward. The men
gathered around the supply house murmur among themselves,
commenting on the prisoner. They can't take their eyes off
him. Neither can Sergeant Bauer. He watches the prisoner
from a distance. Then he walks across the floor, squats in
front of him and whispers coarsely in his face.
Dances With Wolves lifts his head and stares at the sergeant.
The major and the lieutenant suddenly reappear.
There is a silence as Dances With Wolves takes this in.
Elgin tries again.
Dances With Wolves takes a long time to answer.
Surrounded by guards, Dances With Wolves is being walked
toward a clump of bushes.
He glances out at the prairie. Cisco's body lies where it
fell. Black birds are pecking it.
A rifle butt bangs him hard between the shoulder blades and
Dances With Wolves attacks. Before anyone else can move he
has taken the offending soldier to the ground and is
strangling him.
Another rifle butt crashes against his skull and again
everything goes black.
Water drips from Dances With Wolves' head and he comes to
again. As he moves he hears a jangling and discovers that
his hands and feet are in chains. Everyone has assembled.
Sergeant Bauer shoves Dances With Wolves with his gun.
Elgin quickly steps in.
Elgin can see that the major's attitude and inexperience has
killed any chance of communication. He makes one last try on
his own.
The major is surprised. Elgin is not. The major turns on his
heel and walks out. Lieutenant Elgin stares at Dances With
Wolves.
Dances With Wolves kneels by the river, splashing water
lightly on his battered face. Half a dozen soldiers are
lounging around watching him.
Trooper Spivey is crapping in the bushes. Another soldier,
CRAPPER, is crapping not far away. Spivey can see Dances
With Wolves in the distance, still splashing water on his
face.
Now he slips something out of his tunic. It's the journal.
He opens it and starts to tear out a page, trying hard not
to make noise.
Spivey thinks.
Spivey looks down at the stolen journal, thinking.
Two Sioux scouts watch from the brow of a slope above the
fort. Having spotted Dances With Wolves, they withdraw.
We see Dances With Wolves at a distance, being marched back
to his "cell" by the detail of soldiers. He's moving awkwardly
in his chains.
Dances With Wolves is half-dozing against the wall when Spivey
walks in with a plate of army gruel. He's followed by Sergeant
Bauer. Spivey sets the plate in front of the prisoner. He
admires the breastplate and like a crow eyeing something
shiny, he thinks to grab for it.
Suddenly a pair of manacled hands lock on his wrists. Dances
With Wolves face is inches away from Spiveys. Terrified,
Spivey pulls away, kicking over the plate of food as he
scrambles to safety across the room.
Dances With Wolves sticks a toe under the lip of the plate
and flips it over. Most of it hits Spivey, a little splashes
on Bauer. Spivey moves to kick the prisoner, but Bauer
intercedes with his rifle.
Bauer and Spivey leave him and Dances With Wolves kicks out
viciously at the spilled plate.
There's a tremendous upheaval. Ten Bears' band has halted
its march. SIX PAINTED WARRIORS all heavily armed are jumping
onto their ponies and being handed the lines to spare mounts.
Wind In His Hair is their leader.
The whole village is up to see them off.
Smiles A Lot, painted and carrying a bow and quiver rides
into the midst of the group. Wind In His Hair studies the
resolute boy.
Smiles A Lot nods.
With a great whooping from the villagers, the rescue party
roars out of camp.
The wagon is pulling out with an escort of SEVEN SOLDIERS.
Dances With Wolves' spirits are very low as he sits in the
bed of the jolting wagon. Spivey is guarding him. Elgin is
leading the detail.
Dances with Wolves watches a ridge in the distance for any
sign of riders.
Elgin and one of the escort soldiers are scouting far out on
the prairie. The lieutenant pauses and looks back at the
wagon. It is far behind in the distance, but still coming.
Dances With Wolves is dozing as the wagon jolts across the
ground. Suddenly a shot rings out. Dances With Wolves opens
his eyes.
The wagon driver is aiming his rifle out at something on the
prairie. He fires again.
Dances With Wolves looks over the wagon bed and sees Two
Socks. He's standing still, fifty yards away. Staring in his
old inquisitive way at the wagon.
Two shots ring out in rapid succession.
Sergeant Bauer fires his own round. Everyone has missed.
Bauer is jamming another cartridge into the chamber.
Now Spivey decides to get into the act. He rises up with his
rifle aiming.
Before he can fire, there's a rattling of chains. And the
next moment, Spivey's feet are being pulled out from under
him by Dances With Wolves. His rifle fires harmlessly into
space.
Bauer turns from the wagon seat and slams the back of the
prisoner's head with the gunstock. Dances With Wolves falls
back, letting go of the shaken Spivey.
Bauer smiles at Spivey contemptuously.
In the next instant, Spivey gives Dances With Wolves a
resounding crack in the sternum with the butt of his rifle
and he goes down on his back.
More shots are fired. Dazedly, Dances With Wolves looks out
and sees Two Socks still running parallel to the wagon.
There's another shot and then shouting.
Spivey is still poking Dances With Wolves.
Elgin has ridden alongside the wagon.
Elgin's men are headed up towards Two Socks when shots ring
out.
The camera continues over the hill to Two Socks' body, but
it is no where in sight. Instead the Indian war party of six
is waiting silently in ambush. Frustrated, they will try
again.
The wagon is making its way steadily down, toward the river.
Dances With Wolves watches the line of growth along the river
get closer, his eyes and ears and nose full alert.
If they come this will be the place to do it. Dances With
Wolves will make the most of this hope.
The wagon moves down a narrow pathway, not much more than a
game trail. The lieutenant raises his hand and the wagon
halts at the river's edge.
A soldier rides back and forth in the water on the other
side of the river. He's checking for any signs of ambush.
The soldier starts back to them.
Elgin starts into the water, followed by the wagon. The "all
clear" sign means nothing to Dances With Wolves. He's all
keyed up.
Elgin and a soldier are leading the way. They're only a few
yards from the opposite bank when the lieutenant is taken.
Elgin is completely surprised to find an arrow buried in his
chest.
The outrider is about to pull up his gun when an arrow hits
him square in the gut. He brings his head up to see the full
force of Wind In His Hair, stringing up another arrow and
taking aim.
Just as the outrider is struggling to raise his gun, Wind In
His Hair fires off another arrow deep into the man's heart.
The impact sends him flying out of the saddle, dead.
Wind In His Hair comes on, leading five Sioux warriors.
Dances With Wolves has looped the shackles around Spivey's
neck in a death grip when he sees Bauer leveling his rifle
at the approaching riders.
Dances With Wolves aims a vicious kick at Bauer, sending the
rifle flying, and Bauer over the edge of the wagon. Bauer
flounders in the water, fumbling for his pistol. He sends
off a round taking one of the on rushing warriors in the
shoulder. The Sioux looses his seat and tumbles off the pony
into the water, wounded.
Dances With Wolves snaps the loop around Spivey's neck as
hard as he can and bone breaks.
Dances With Wolves is beating Spivey furiously with his
chains. He keeps whacking until the blood is spreading on
the surface of the water.
The frantic driver is about to make a run for it when he is
impaled with a Sioux lance.
The two soldiers in the back of the wagon have turned tail
and are splashing back across the river.
As they scramble up the bank, two Sioux warriors meet them
and cut them down with hatchets.
In the midst of the smoke and confusion of the battle, Bauer
has made his way to the cover of the weeds along the river
bank.
Crashing through the thicket, he comes to a clearing and
there in the shallows, comes face to face with Smiles A Lot.
The boy is standing in the shallows holding the extra horses.
The boy is so frightened at the sudden sight of this white
soldier that he doesn't move. Bauer sticks his revolver into
Smiles A Lot's face and pulls the trigger. But the hammer
only clicks. The gun is empty.
Bauer pistol-whips the boy, knocking him to the ground and
grabs for the closest of the horses. But the ponies are all
stirred up now and starting to run down the river.
Bauer succeeds in grabbing a hunk of mane, but the horse
he's gotten hold of is moving too fast for him to get on.
But now Bauer hears a bone-chilling whoop. Wind In His Hair
is coming.
His pony plows through the water at full speed. A skullcracker
dangles from one hand. The warrior begins to whirl it around.
Terrified, Bauer turns to run. Before he can take a step, a
hatchet buries itself to the hilt. Smiles A Lot is at the
other end. But Bauer is not through.
His hands are around the boy's neck, choking him with his
last seconds of life. A larger than life Wind In His Hair
draws even and swings his club. Bauer's head explodes,
covering Smiles A Lot in blood -- the sergeant's hands cannot
be seen.
Still in chains, Dances With Wolves and Wind In His Hair are
dragging Elgin's body onto shore. Dances With Wolves rifles
through the dead man's pockets. He finds a set of keys and
plops down to unlock his shackles.
The wounded Indian warrior is being tended to. Smiles A Lot
is downstream washing Bauer's blood off.
A warrior is stripping down Spivey. He holds up the dead
man's tunic, but doesn't notice that something plops out.
It's the journal. It floats off into the current, well out
of Dances With Wolves field of vision. It is lost forever.
The journal continues its downstream journey. Suddenly a
small hand reaches down and scoops it out of the water.
Smiles A Lot holds the book close to his face amazed at the
sight of words.
The party is mounting. Smiles A Lot rides up next to Dances
With Wolves.
He offers the book. Dances With Wolves takes it, regarding
the journal.
The rescue party is cantering across the prairie.
This doesn't seem to bother Wind In His Hair. But it sets
Dances With Wolves to thinking.
The sound of a single drum calls attention to eight
silhouettes on horseback making their way down the ridge.
The entire village begins to rumble with excitement as the
news spreads.
The rescue party is walking down the trail single file. Dances
With Wolves is a few slots back. All the village is racing
up the canyon to greet them.
Stands With A Fist leads them all. She runs to Dances With
Wolves. She jumps all over her husband and finally he lifts
her up on his pony.
The couple we have come to know are sitting on their bed.
Dances With Wolves is combing Stands With A Fist's hair.
It's something he is doing with care and affection. She is
loving it as much as he. They are together as two people can
be and yet it is a hard time.
Dances With Wolves lays his forehead on her back. He sighs.
Then he pulls away, slips a robe around his shoulders and
walks out of the lodge.
Sadly, she watches him go.
We follow a pair of boots walking in the snow. Pan up to
find an ORDERLY bringing coffee to a MAJOR. He is surrounded
by other officers and in front of him a large column of men
is moving toward the snow covered mountains.
The Major tosses the remaining coffee in a fire and he
prepares to mount.
We pan up with the smoke and the steam.
It's cold in the Sioux camp. A warm column of smoke is
spiraling out of Ten Bears' lodge.
Several men are gathered around Ten Bears' fire, including
Kicking Bird, Wind In His Hair and Dances With Wolves.
All the men are draped with blankets. The wind is howling
outside. The men are engaged in small talk as the pipe goes
around the circle.
The pipe comes around to Dances With Wolves, and the man
next to him must nudge him to attention. Dances With Wolves
takes the pipe and begins to smoke.
Ten Bears watches him closely.
He does not reply. He smokes a little more and passes the
pipe.
Dances With Wolves glances at the men around the fire.
He searches for the right words.
Objections break out all around the fire. Wind In His Hair
jumps to his feet and even Kicking Bird is protesting.
The column of soldiers can be heard but not seen. They are
moving forward, singing the Battle Hymn of The Republic.
Stands With A Fist is building up the fire in their cozy
home. Dances With Wolves works on a long-stemmed pipe which
is in the last stages of completion.
Dances With Wolves gets up, opens the flap and admits the
old chief. A few snowflakes cling to his wispy hair.
He goes straight to the fire and sits.
Stands With A Fist brings two small bowls of food, places
them next to the men and busies herself with something else.
Though neither one is much interested they begin to eat.
Dances With Wolves smiles.
It's anguish for Dances with Wolves to think about his
friends. He shakes his head "no". Ten Bears thinks again in
silence.
Ten Bears words always have purpose and as always, he makes
his point.
He pauses for a moment and notices Dances with Wolves' nearly
finished pipe.
Ten Bears holds out a hand and Dances with Wolves hands the
pipe to him. Ten Bears inspects it briefly.
From a little distance, Wind In His Hair is watching Dances
With Wolves' lodge. His face is full of uncertainty and a
kind of pain we have never seen before. He is in agony.
He starts forward but after a few yards he stops to think.
He turns back but has only gone a few steps when he stops
and turns to face Dances With Wolves' lodge once more. He
starts for the tipi again, but he can't go thru with it. The
proud warrior turns away and walks quickly out of sight.
The column is moving at a leisurely walk when the horses
start to bunch up. They're stopping.
Everyone waits while far up ahead, a group of ten or twelve
men examine the ground. White officers sits atop their horses,
while their scouts scour the ground. They've found a
significant trail.
The scouts are Indian, and by their distinctive dress, we
recognize them. They are Pawnee.
The Pawnee scouts come racing up. Their horses are wet and
have come a good distance. The scouts are very excited.
The men have dismounted. They prepare for battle, removing
any equipment that might rattle -- tin cups, plates, etc.,
tossing the discards into a growing pile.
Black Shawl watches as Kicking Bird slips a magnificent pipe
into its buckskin case. Now he looks at her. The medicine
man too is in a kind of pain we have not seen before.
Carrying the pipe he made, Dances With Wolves walks through
the village. Suddenly he stops. Kicking Bird is standing in
the middle of the empty avenue.
Like gunfighters, the two men approach each other at a slow
and deliberate walk.
Gradually they realize that each has selected the same parting
gift. It's heartbreaking. Kicking Bird tries to cover with a
casual question, but it's all fake.
Dances With Wolves moves to make the exchange. Kicking Bird
does the same. From one hand to the other. Men couldn't be
closer.
Neither can speak. There is only goodbye.
The column of soldiers is not in a rush, but they're trotting
now to make better time.
Stands With A Fist sits on a pony outside the lodge. Two
pack horses are loaded with their things.
Dances With Wolves swings onto his pony's back and we follow
as they start out of the village. No one is standing in rose
to watch them leave. No one is crying. In fact, people are
making the motions of going about their regular work.
But it's all fake too. The whole village is sad and the most
obvious sign is that there is no sound. In the awful quiet,
most people avert their eyes as the two pass by.
Dances With Wolves and Stands With A Fist have reached the
head of the trail leading out of the winter camp. They have
just begun to ascend when a voice, calling from afar, brings
them to a halt. The sound echoes through the canyons, through
the village.
His pony is jacked up and, as always, Wind In His Hair looks
the perfect warrior. But now his face is full of stress as
he screams out the message he could not deliver in person.
Everyone in the camp has stopped to listen.
Dances With Wolves looks ready to crack.
Dances With Wolves lets the unhappy echo of these words fade
away before he starts his pony again. We follow for a few
yards. Then the call comes a second time. If anything, more
urgent than before.
Dances With Wolves stops. He drops his head painfully as the
sound of his own name booms through his head.
Troops are moving through the trees quietly, sabers drawn.
The rest of the troops have moved to the edge. They too are
quiet. Down below, the Pawnee scouts are milling about looking
for sign.
The soldiers from the canyon floor are silently arriving on
the scene. The Pawnee look to the lead scout on the canyon
rim. They have no answer, and the lead scout has none to
give the general at his side. Ten Bears' village is gone.
Wind In His Hair and several other warriors are just drawing
back from unseen vantage points on the canyon rim. Wind In
His Hair glances back and hesitates, as though waiting for
someone. A great, yellow full moon has just appeared above
the opposite rim of the canyon. The yellow is brilliant, a
great spotlight of golden color.
A wolf steps into the light on the opposite rim. He's walking
in the backdrop of the moon. The wolf suddenly arches his
back, sticks his muzzle in the air and produces a spine-
tingling howl. The sound bounces all over the canyon.
Dances With Wolves is at the canyon's rim. He listens a long
time, fully entranced by the wolf's howl. He is still
listening when it is gone. A whisper floats out of the night
behind him.
Dances With Wolves shrinks back from the canyon's rim, turns
and trots off into the darkness, following his friends.

It's an early Friday morning and a patrol car drives up an
unpaved road and parks next to a gutted police car on cinder
blocks. The camera pans with the OFFICER as he exits his car
and walks up to a ramp leading to the babay blue JAIL HOUSE.
He is carrying a greasy bag of fast food.
The Officer enters the lobby, tosses the bag of food to his
PARTNER who is sitting at a desk. He grabs a tin cup and
walks over to barred entrance to Block A. Twenty or so
CRIMINALS, from drunks to drug dealers are sleeping
peacefully in their cell on Block A. The Officer rattles the
tin cup between the entrance bar.
The inmates stir, rubbing their dirty faces and trying to sit
up. The camera dollies slowly down the narrow hallway of the
block which has three cells: Two small ones side by side, and
one bigger cell that faces the block entrance. The sound of
scribbling and business dealing can be heard from inside the
cell. It is AZUL jottin ginto a business ledger while
chatting on his cellular phone. His cell is equipped with a
small desk and a refridgerator. He hangs up the phone and
continues writing.
The Officer with the tin cup sits in a couch across from his
partner, who is now eating, and reads a magazine.
Azul picks up his phone and makes another call. He talks
business. In the other cell, prisoners are getting up and
looking around. Azul hangs up the phone and writes.
A gorgeous, bikini-clad BABE struts slowly into a tighly
framed glamour shot. She pauses, takes a deep breath, then
dives a 'perfect ten' dive into a house-side moat. She swims
long, slow motion strokes around the moat as the camera
tracks alonside her, lovingly admiring her tan lines and
hydrodynamic build. She slides out of the water and walks up
a cobble stone walk, dripping as she passes a seated
GENTLEMAN in a white suit. His face is unrevealed. As she
enters the house, he sets his drink down by a phone. He lifts
up the receiver and dials.
Azul's phone rings. He looks up at it, startled, as if no one
has ever called him before. He glances at his watch, and then
back at the phone, hesitating to answer it. He looks around
the cell block as if someone might be playing a trick on him.
Finally he answers it, pausing before saying hello. It is El
Moco.
MOCO is sitting on his porch drinking tequila.
Azul is walking towards his window at the sound of a truck
racing in.
A large truck drives up to the jail, parking beside the
police car. Two tall, well-dressed MEN step out. They reach
into the cab and pull out machine guns. They walk briskly
towards the jail.
Azul walks to his toilet and stands on it to see out his
barred window.
There is no response from Moco.
The Guard reading the magazine stands when he sees someone
approaching the door.
Close tracking shot of guns as Tall Men open the door and
enter the jail.
Azul looks out of the jail cell suspiciously. Peering down
the hall, he sees the guys with the guns. He hides behind the
wall, peering out to see what happens next.
The Tall Men walk right up to the guard, and hand him a huge
wad of money. The Guard tosses the money to his partner
(still eating), then turns to unlock the block entrance bars.
Azul puts the receiver back up to his mouth.
Moco, glancing at his watch, hangs up.
Azul hangs up the phone and kicks his Bodyguard awake. The
Bodyguard gets up and peers out the bars as Azul hides in a
corner.
The Tall Men walk steady and alert, ready to kill. They enter
Azul's block and scope out the cells.
The Bodyguard, seeing the tall men, retrieves his shotgun
from under his mattress and grabs his machete from under the
sink. He stands ready to fight.
The Tall Men move slowly towards the big cell, somewhat
cautious. They see the Bodyguard a second too late, for he
sticks the shotgun between the bars, and shoots one of them
before they can react. The shot one stumbles back into his
buddy's arms. Azul's Bodyguard, amused by all this, opens his
cell door effortlessly, and walks out as if to greet them.
The Tall Men hear the sound of the other cells opening, so
they turn around. The other prisoners on the block begin
exiting their cells, carrying guns and Molotov cocktails. The
Tall Man drops his gun. Finally, Azul exits his cell carrying
his phone. The Bodyguard forces the Tall Men into an empty
cell, closing and locking the door.
Azul presses the #-button on his phone. Moco's phone number
is automatically redialed.
Moco answers.
The cellmates throw their Molotov cocktails into the cell.
Moco hears the men screaming as they burn to death. Azul is
holding the phone at arm's length into the cell.
The Guards exchange glances when they hear the screaming,
they smile and shrug, then go back to what they were doing.
As Azul and his Bodyguards exit the block, the Guard with the
magazine stands up as if to stop them, but Azul tosses him a
wad of money and the guard sits back down to count it.
A blue truck races towards the jail.
Azul exits the jail carrying a shotgun. His Bodyguards get
inside the Tall Men's truck and start it. Azul waits
patiently for his blue truck.
As the blue truck pulls up, two little rat-like VATOS exit
the blue truck, one handing Azul a guitar case. Azul tosses
it onto the hood. The Bodyguards wave as they drive away.
Azul waves back. He opens the case, revealing an arsenal of
weaponry. Azul notices one piece is missing. One Rat quickly
pulls the missing weapon from his jacket and replaces it in
the case. Azul is unamused. He grabs his MAC-10 machine gun
from the guitar case and aims it at the thieving Rat's head.
Suddenly, the Guard bolts out the jail waving the wad of
money, as if complaining.
Azul turns his MAC-10 onto the Guard instead. A few blasts
later Azul and his rats pack up and go as the Guard twitches
helplessly on the ground, still clutching the money in his
bloody hand.
The blue truck barels down the highway and the camera pans
with the truck as it passes a hitchhiker, MARIACHI, standing
in the sun with a thumb in the air.
The truck passes him up so he continues walking. Mariachi is
carrying a guitar case in one hand and a black jacket in the
other. He is wearing a white T-shirt, black pants. The camera
pans to a sign that reads "ACUNA 18 miles".
Mariachi is walking around downtown Acuna. He notices a bar
across the street and, liking the way it looks, he puts on
his jacket and crosses over to it. He stops to read a sign on
the building that says "MEMBERS AND NON-MEMBERS ONLY". He
prays silently to himself before confidently walking inside.
Mariachi enters the club, greeting the PATRONS as ge makes
his way to the bar. No one seems to greet him back. He sits
on a barstool near some OTHER DRINKERS, laying his guitar
case down lovingly beneath his stool. He looks around the
place, as if sizing it up.
The other drinkers stare at him.
Glancing around the room, Mariachi notices a small, table-
shaped object draped with a cloth in one corner of the room.
Sitting directly behind him are four mean-looking dudes.
Mariachi is served his drink.
Mariachi gives him a silent "what" look.
The BARTENDER motions to a YOUNG MAN sitting near the small
draped table.
The Young Man removes the drape revealing a keyboard. Puts on
his mariachi hat, dips his fingers into his shot glass and
rubs his fingers together (as if warming up for the big
show). He hits a few switches in EXTREME CLOSEUP as...
... Mariachi adjusts himself to the seat.
The Young Men gently taps one switch and the keyboard sounds
like an accordion, pulsing out a beat. He then presses
another switch and a horn section swells to a crescendo and
waltzes the familiar riffs. He adds the string and horns
accents by banging on the keys. He sounds awful.
Mariachi grimaces slightly then turns back to the Bartender
who seems to enjoy it.
The Keyboard Mariachi finishes his song, sits back down.
Mariachi picks up his guitar and lays some money next to his
full drink. He looks disappointed.
The Bartender picks up the bottle of soda pop Mariachis left
behind and offers it to the other men on the table. They say
no, pay, and leave. The Bartender offers it to the MEAN DUDES
at the table.
They all shake their heads no.
The Bartender shrugs and dumps it.
Mariachi walks out and looks up and down the street. He
decides to walk south.
As he walks down the sidewalk, the camera pans into a CLOSEUP
of another guitar case that is moving towards the Corona
Club. The camera falls back a little revealing the backside
of Azul, dressed also in black. Azul walks into the bar.
Azul enters the bar, notices to his left the table with the
four mean-looking Dudes, drinking and eating chips and salsa.
The oldest one, with his back to Azul, takes a sip from his
mixed drink, then stands and excuses himself to the restroom.
The Old Mean Dude walks into the first stall and sits down.
The three remaining Dudes notice Azul's guitar case. So does
the Bartender. They all look at each other and laugh.
Azul walks the mean Dude's table. Their laughing quiets down
a bit as Azul stands before them. The Bartender stops
smiling.
The Bartender nods and grabs a frosty glass. He begins to
fill up at the tap.
Bartender stops filling the beer, stares at the half-full
glass for a moment, then drinks the beer.
Azul is staring at the three Mean Dudes. They stare back.
The Bartender slaps the unopened bottle down at the counter.
Azul doesn't pay attention to him.
You can sometimes find him here. He owns this place.
We work for him.
Azul turns to the mean Dude sitting to his left, and places
the guitar in his hands. The Mean Dude is confused.
Azul opens the case and pulls out the MAC-10. The other two
Mean Dudes are already reaching for their pistols.
The Bartender ducks beneath the counter.
Azul fires a million bullets into two of the Mean Dudes, (the
other is holding the case in shock). Their chests explode,
causing neat little dollops of flesh and blood fly
everywhere.
The Mean Dude holding the guitar case is frozen with fear. He
manages to look up at Azul, who is watching the Mean Dudes
die a slow, bloody death. The barrel of the MAC-10 is
smoking. Azul turns slowly to the Mean Dude holding the case.
Azul aims his MAC-10 in the Dude's face. Still frozen holding
the case, he spends his last moments looking down the gun's
barrel.
The shots caused Old Mean Dude to peer out from his stall as
the toilet paper fell to the ground and started to roll
across the floor. He now watches it roll as more shots ring
out. He pulls up his pants and and walks toward the door
slowly. He is sweating profusely. He slowly picks up the
toilet paper, plotting his next move. It grows silent... He
takes a deep breath and rushes out the door.
The Old Dude bursts into the room with a roll of toilet paper
in his hand, and a sheet of sweat sliding down his face.
The Bartender rises up from behind the counter.
The camera dollies slowly by the dead Dudes. Their blood-
bathed faces twisted into odd shapes and expressions. The
camera continues to dolly to the one dead Dude still holding
the guitar case. His face is a bloody pulp. The camera stops
dollying to the old Dude's mixed drink. A hand is stirring it
with a straw. The camera pans up the arm to reveal Azul,
standing expressionless with his gun sling over his shoulder.
Shot at 16fps the Old Dude quickly drops the toilet paper and
runs back inside the bathroom.
Azul turns to his guitar case and carefully chooses another
weapon. He grabs the drink and tosses a napkin over his arm
like a waiter, then casually follows the Old Dude into the
bathroom.
The Bartenders glance at each other. One pours a shot glass
full of tequila and raises it to his lips to drink it. Shots
ring out and the Bartender spills the drink over himself.
Without warning Azul bursts from the bathroom and walks
calmly to his case. He replaces the weapon, picks up the case
and leaves.
A few seconds pass before the bartender grabs the phone and
furiously dials.
The door bursts open as Azul reenters, storming to the bar.
The Bartender is so petrified he doesn't think to drop the
phone.
Azul walks right up to the Bartender.
The Bartender shuts his eyes. The sound of the beer bottle
popping open canbe heard, along with the sound of thirsty
guzzling. The Bartender opens his eyes to Azul.
CLOSEUP of the empty bottle slamming to the counter.
The Bartender glances down at the bottle.
CLOSEUP of Azul tossing a few coins near the bottle as
payment. Azul leaves.
A few seconds pass as the Bartender is standing there. You
hear Moco yelling into the receiver asking what's going on.
Moco is on the porch trying to get the Bartender to answer
him.
You hear Moco's voice through the phone. The camera dollies
into the Bartender as he screams into the receiver.
The camera dollies in to the corpses...
... and finally a low outdoor frontal tracking shot of Azul
walking away smiling as the image fades out.
Low angle of Hotel Coahuila sign. MEAN DUDE #5 enters the
frame as his beeper goes off. He runs into the Hotel
Coahuila.
Mean Dude #5 enters the lobby where an OLD CLERK is sitting
at the counter reading a yellowed newspaper. There is a pit
bull on the floor beside him.
Da me telefono.
Mean Dude #5 grabs the phone and dials Moco's number. He
glances down at the PIT BULL lying on the floor.
Pit bull?
The line is picked up and Mean Dude talks into the phone. He
pulls out a piece of paper from his coat pocket and places it
on the counter. He begins jotting down four names. He then
slowly crosses their names out.
The Viejo Clerk glances up from his paper. The Pit Bull also
glances up.
Clerk goes back to reading his paper. Pit Bull is still
paying attention, though.
Same low-angle shot of the outdoor sign displaying the name
Hotel Coahuila. Mariachi walks into frame, and pulls out his
wallet. Mariachi pulls out a few measly bucks then seems to
be considering what to do next.
An inside shot looking out of the front glass reveals
Mariachi looking at his wallet as Mean Dude talks to the
phone. No one notices him.
The Pit Bull turns and looks out of the window. Seeing
Mariachi, he gets up and walks to it.
Mariachi is putting his last few dollars back into his
wallet. As he is walking away he notices the Pit Bull and he
bends down for a closer look.
Low shot with long lens at full zoom of Mariachi tapping on
glass.
CLOSEUP of dog responing.
CLOSEUP of Mariachi tapping.
Mean Dude hangsup the phone. He writes a few more things. He
turns to leave.
As he passes the camera you can see Mariachi still playing
with the dog. Inside view CLOSEUP of Mariachi tapping on
glass.
The Mean Dude turns around and looks and looks at the Clerk.
Clerk turns to look at Mean Dude, who is walking back to the
counter.
Mariachi picks his guitar from the ground. He is in full
view, but no one is looking at him.
Mean Dude writes down a phone number and the description of
Azul on a little card.
The sarcastic smile fades from the old man. Mean Dude walks
away. The old man reads the card, then glances out the
window. Mariachi is gone.
Mariachi is turning a corner just as Mean Dude #5 exits the
hotel. The Mean Dude walks off in the other direction.
Mariachi enters Domino's bar. DOMINO is waiting on a few bar
bums that are nursing their jaws. Mariachi sits with them,
asks for a refresco, He gets looks again. Domino serves him
and he asks to see the owner. She says he's looking at the
owner. He then asks her for work as a mariachi. She says she
has no money to pay him. He looks arund the classy joint and
knows she's lying (it turns out to be true, she has no
money). When he asks how a girl can take care of herself in a
town like this she stuffs a gun barrel in his mouth. He
nurses his jaw, pays and leaves, as the others laugh.
Mariachi enters the run-down lobby of the motel. The Viejo
Clerk at the counter is reading his yellowed newspaper.
Mariachi sees the Pit Bull laying by the counter.
The Old Man hands Mariachi a key for the second floor.
As Mariachi walks away, the Clerk notices the guitar case and
black clothes and he rereads the card Mean Dude left him.
Mariachi stops in his tracks. He turns back to the Clerk
slowly... thinking.
The dog is watching the event.
The Clerk deposits the money, slams the register shut, and
continues reading his yellow paper. Confused, Mariachi
pockets his empty wallet and turns to find his room.
The Clerk peeks over his paper, eyeing the guitar case as
Mariachi goes. He hears the sound of Mariachi's footsteps
trailing off. The old man drops the paper and bolts silently
to the phone as he dials El Moco's phone number...
Mariachi opens his room, tosses his guitar onto the bed and
hangs his jacket in the closet. He has only his white T-shirt
underneath. He glances above the bed to a plaque bearing a
mace and two crossed swords. He checks out the shower and
washes his face in the sink. He sits down on his bed. A few
seconds later he drops back and lays there a minute before
kicking the door shut. He tries to sleep.
The Old Clerk is talking on the phone to the bad guys. He
hangs up the phone, then reaches into the back of his counter
for a gun. He places it on the counter and covers it with his
newspaper and continues reading.
Top shot of Mariachi sleeping. A shot of the mace on the
wall.
Mariachi is suddenly sleeping in the dirt. Same top shot as
in the hotel. He opens his eyes, then groggily he sits up.
ESTABLISHING SHOT of Mariachi sitting in the middle of a
ghost town. He stands up.
VARIOUS SHOTS of the empty town with nothing and nobody.
Medium shot dolly into Mariachi as he stands, turns and sees
a BOY bouncing a ball in slow motion. The Boy stops short,
holding the ball tight against the chest. Mariachi glances
around to maybe spot more people, before concentrating on the
Boy.
The Boy places the ball carefully on the ground, then gently
rolls it to Mariachi.
Tracking shot of the ball rolling to Mariachi. The ball
sounds like a speeding truck. Mariachi smiles at the boy.
CLOSEUP of the ball rolling.
CLOSEUP of the Boy smiling.
Mariachi bends to get the ball which makes the sound of a
screeching truck as it hits Mariachi's foot. Mariachi notices
that it's a man's severed head.
Mariachi bolts up in bed.
The Mean Dudes jump out of their truck and rush into the
hotel, guns drawn.
The men burst into the lobby and the old men tells them the
room number. They run out into the courtyard with the old man
following. The Pit Bull is uninterested in the action.
The Mean Dudes run up the courtyard stairs and kick open the
first door they come to and start blasting into the room.
Screams are heard. The men stand back, and finally look down
the steps at the Viejo Clerk who is waving his arms
frantically.
They run to the room numbered 127 and cautiously stalk
towards it as they reload their guns.
Mariachi is sitting on his bed listening to all this. He
bolts to the restroom and turns to the shower.
Shot of men still stalking, cocking pistols.
POV shot of what men see, as camera nears the door.
Mariachi rushes out of the bathroom towards the door.
Men kick open the door and burst into the room.
Low-angle shot as men burst in. There is no one in the room.
Mean Dude #5 hears the shower and motions to keep it down and
stalk quietly... They rush into the bathroom and start
blasting.
Mariachi slips out from behind the door and runs out.
Mariachi runs out of the room and jumps off the stairwell
onto the courtyard in front of the Clerk.
Mariachi darts out into the lobby. The old man watches him go
then turns his attention back to Mariachi's room.
The dog watches as Mariachi tosses his keys into the cubby
hole where they belong. Mariachi then jumps over the counter,
banging keys on the register to get it open.
The Mean Dudes run out of Mariachi's room, dart down the
stairs, passing the old man who is telling them where to go.
Mariachi, unable to open the register, jumps over the
counter.
CLOSEUP of his feet as he lands, causing the register to
burst open.
Mariachi truns for a second to ponder gettin ghis money or
risking dying, but then he checks to turn and run. Two
seconds later the Mean Dudes run in, one jumps over the
counter to see if he's there.
Mariachi runs atop the Mean Dudes' parked truck then jumps
into the bed of a passing truck. Mean Dudes run outside. The
Dudes hve their hands up as if they don't know what to look
for.
Shots of lots of people walking around, wearing black items.
The truck turns a corner and the driver halts, comes out with
a gun and tell Mariachi to get the hell out of his truck.
Mariachi leaps out. He is about to continue running, but he
stops, clenches his fists, and turns slowly as the camera
dollies into his face.
Camera dollies into the guitar case on Mariachi's bed.
Mariachi runs back in the direction of the hotel, but as he
turns the corner he has to slow down for the Mean Dudes are
everywhere. Each one has his gun out and is looking around
for the man in black. Mariachi walks slowly, whistling and
nodding to everyone as they pass. A few look suspiciously at
him but continue searching. Mariachi ducks inside the hotel.
Mariachi enters the lobby and winks at the old Clerk who is
standing over his open register in shock. His eyes widen when
he sees Mariachi. He runs out of the hotel.
Mariachi rushes in, grabs his jacket and puts it on. He grabs
his guitar case and squeezes it tight, his eyes shut. Slow
dolly into him, as his eyes open.
CLOSEUP of plague on wall with mace and swords. He grabs the
mace, swining it around a few times. He feels secure, now. He
turns to leave.
Mariachi rushes out the door, he looks down and sees the Mean
Dudes entering the courtyard. He ducks his head back just as
they look up to see him. Mariachi runs up a smal flight of
steps, where he then tosses his guitar onto a balcony, which
he then jumps over to himself.
The men rush up the steps shooting at the balcony. Bullets
narrowly miss Mariachi as he climbs over the balcony to
safety.
Mariachi dashes down the hallway out onto a balcony. He sees
no way down.
The Mean Dudes are climbing over the balcony like spiders.
Mariachi runs back and slams his guitar into the first guy to
make it over the balcony. His dummy falls down the stairs and
over the narrow railing. The Dude splats on the ground in
gruesome CLOSEUP.
The old man looks over at him as he dies, then turns back as
if nothing happened. Mariachi bolts back down the hill.
Mariachi is looking down the balcony trying to find a way to
escape. Mariachi looks behind him.
Mean Dudes barrel down the hallway reloading the guns.
Mariachi flings his mace over an electric cable, then stands
on the balcony lip, placing his guitar between his legs.
Mariachi is sliding down the cable and turns back to see Mean
Dudes firing guns at him. Bus stops in traffic and Mariachi
grabs his guitar and jumps onto the hood of the bus.
Mariachi jumps onto another car and then down into the
street.
Mean Dudes exit the hotel and chase him on foot while a few
get in the truck and chase him. The truck takes a short cut.
Mariachi is running through the sidewalks and streets in
front os curioso shops, jumping small carts and children and
cars to escape the two men behind him. He enters a small
cutoff where the truck tries to stop him by heading off. The
bad guys stick their heads and guns out of their windows and
laugh as they ready to shoot him. Mariachi, though, already
having built momentum, runs right up the front of the trucks
as the guys try to shoot him but not succeed in only shooting
each other as he runs up and over the cab, into the bed, and
onto the street. He swings his guitar case into another guy's
groin and grabs is gun, reaiming it to shoot Mean Dude #5.
Mariachi shoots him in the arm, and Mean Dude #5 drops his
gun and cowers away in pain. Mariachi then turns the guy's
gun on him and shoots him in the chest. Mariachi grabs his
case and as Mean Dude #5 turns to get s look at him, all he
sees is the case coming into his face. Mariachi heads back
for Domino's.
Mariachi stumbles through city streets, pausing against a
telephone pole as he gazes at Domino's Saloon across the
street.
Mariachi stumbles across, almost getting hit by a few cars,
and drags himself into the saloon.
Mariachi staggers into Amadeus and washes his face in a
fountain by the door. He makes his way to the bar as a patron
pays and leaves.
Domino turns around and looks at Mariachi, wondering hard is
he's joking. He lifts up a bloody hand, grabs a napkin, and
then seems to ask permission with his eyes before wiping his
hands clean.
Mariachi nods an ashamed yes.
Domino reaches for her gun under the counter.
The camera is on Mariachi when she brings it out and points
at him.
She cocks the pistol.
Mariachi stares at her expressionless. She stares back at
him.
She laughes.
Mariachi shakes her hand.
He tries to kiss her hand. She slides it away and
effortlessly slaps him.
He follows her to a doorway revealing an unlit staircase.
When he enters, the darkness swallows him as she shuts the
door behind him.
Mariachi enters a roomy, luxurious apartment above the main
bar.
There is a free-standing porcelain tub in the center of the
room. Mariachi places his guitar halfway between the entrance
and the tub. The camera is tracking backwards with him as he
walks, making th room look endless. He removes his jacket as
he makes his way to the tub. He drops his jacket onto the
floor and gently climbs into the tub. The camera faces him as
he settles back. The camera slowly dollies into him as he
lays back, crosses his fingers, and gives a relaxed smile.
Domino is washing a glass. She the then remembers she has the
gun in her waist belt, so she removes it and sticks it back
under the counter. Wounded Mean Dude #5 comes in limping. She
takes out a towel and drops it on the counter.
She brings up the phone and sets it down where the cloth was.
He picks up the cloth and wraps his arm with it.
Domino looks a little upset. She slides the phone towards him
a bit.
Domino smiles and pours him half a beer mug with tequila. He
laughs and drinks. As he's dialing, the camera is on Domino
as she cleans up a few things, every once in a while glancing
upstairs.
Mean Dude hangs up and puts his head in his hands.
Mean Dude #5 stumbles as he tries to stand.
He is about to walk off with the bloody towel and he turns
back pointing at it. She waves her hand at him, as if
granting him permission to take it. She cleans his glass, and
when he is gone she slams the glass down and runs for the
stairs. A few seconds later she comes back into the bar,
grabs the gun from under the counter and calls her assistant
to watch the bar. He sees the gun and wonders what she's up
to. She storms upstairs.
Domino opens the door abruptly and finds Mariachi taking a
bath. He bolts upright, pulls a towel up from the floor and
sits frozen waiting for Domino's next move. She laughs and
walks to the counter.
Domino turns to a counter and her smile fades. She looks like
she wants to rip Mariachi's throat out with her teeth. She
puts the gun down on the counter. She finds an omnious-
looking knife and then grabs a bottle of shampoo. She walks
over to him, then pulls the knife up to his throat with one
hand while grabbing his hair with the other. He opens his
eyes wide. The shampoo hits the floor and begins to roll.
The shampoo bottle rolls into the guitar case and stops.
Domino sees this, and with her foot reaches out and pulls the
case toward her.
Mariachi tries to catch his breath, pausing before answering
her as if wondering if all this is really happening.
Domino slides her foot out of her shoe, and unsnaps one of
the latches with her toe.
She unsnaps another. The latches snap loud and echo in the
quiet room. Mariachi gasps as she tightens her grip.
She squeezes his hair and unsnaps another latch.
Another latch snaps.
She lifts the lid with her foot. It seems an eternity before
the case is fully open. Domino is looking into the case, but
Mariachi is not. He knows what's in there.
Slow dolly into the case, which contains a white, well-kept
classical guitar. Domino is seeing it, and for a moment she
almost believes he is telling the truth.
She rushes to it, grabs the guitar and tosses it to Mariachi.
He catches it, choking after she releases the blade. She is
on the other side of the tub, now. She jams the knife down
between Mariachi's legs. Mariachi's eyes bug.
Domino shoves the knife in deeper and Mariachi grimaces
horribly.
Mariachi is sweating and his face is extremely red. He pauses
for a long time before plucking an odd note. She squints as
if she's caught him. But he eventually starts picking out a
sweet little melody.
Mariachi starts to sing but chokes on the words. He starts
over, playing a "Rancho Grande" sounding song with his own
made up words.
He finishes his song, bowing and thanking his imaginary
audience. Domino is smiling. She pulls the knife slowly out
of the water and wipes it off on her apron.
Mariachi bows a solemn thank you.
CLOSEUP of the knife.
She laughs.
Domino looks at him with a silent "what?".
She gets up slowly, and turns to leave. Mariachi settles
back, smiling triumphantly. Suddenly she darts around and
slams the knife between his legs again with a furious look on
her face. He bolts up out of this triumphant daze with a look
of complete shock. She loosens up and laughs.
She flings her knife aside. It sticks into a wall. She
shrugs, smiles a beautiful smile, turns, and goes downstairs.
Mariachi settles back down, closing his eyes. The knife slips
out of the wall and clangs to the ground. Mariachi jumps
again, rolls his eyes, and sinks underwater as the picture
fades.
Mariachi plays in Amadeus.
Camera tracks past a pool table where TWO RATS are playing
nine ball. They make a few shots, then the phone rings. The
camera continues to track past a small table where Azul's
guitar case lies open. Weapons adorn it, with each knife,
each gun in its pocket, in its own place. The camera
continues tracking to a dresser on which sits Azul's cellular
phone. A delicate female hand lifts the receiver. The camera
is now positioned above the bed as the GIRL answers the
phone.
He rolls over and wakes a GIRL sleeping beside her. Girl #2
takes the phone and passes it to a third GIRL as Girl #2
tries to wake Azul (he is sleeping between Girls #2 and #3.).
Girl #3 has the phone to her ear as if listening for
background conversation.
The two Rats playing pool are staring longingly at the three
Girls in Azul's bed. They look hungry and deprived. One hits
the other, signaling it's his shot. While one shoots, the
other watches.
Azul awakens and grabs the phone.
Moco is sitting in his pool. A swimming WAITER is bringing
him drinks.
Azul hangs up. He gets dressed and leaves. The little Rats
are about to follow, but one Rat walks over to get one look
at the girls. The girls tease him, and when he tries to
advance them, they pull guns and laugh as the Rat runs away.
Domino walks by with a trash can. Mariachi is sitting on a
barstool.
Mariachi gets up and is about to get his guitar case from
under the stool.
Mariachi leaves it under the stool and takes off the jacket.
Mariachi leaves. Domino drops the trash can and tells her
assistant to watch the bar. She heads for the staircase.
Domino walks out onto her balcony, peering down into the
street.
POV shot of Mariachi walking through the street.
Domino turns and walks to the phone. She dials a number by
heart and sits in a plush chair.
Moco answers the phone. Towel around his neck, wet hair.
Dolly into Moco.
The Clerk is reading a paper. He hears a noise and pulls it
aside. Mariachi is standing at the counter smiling. The Clerk
jumps in his seat, then after a few frozen seconds he sets
down his paper and reaches for Mariachi's old room key.
Mariachi shakes his head "no", points to the register, and
makes the money sign with his hand. The Clerk slowly moves
over to the register. He depresses a few keys to open it. It
won't open. He makes a gesture like it's stuck or something
(he is not very convincing). He tries again and again; each
time pretending to get more impatient.Mariachi glances down
at the Pit Bull. The Pit Bull is eyeing Mariachi.
Mariachi points to the Clerk as if he has an inside joke with
the dog ("this guy..."). Mariachi climbs over the counter and
stands next to the Clerk. The Clerk things Mariachi is a
lunatic. Mariachi holds up a finger as if cueing the Clerk
for a demonstration. Mariachi then leaps over the counter
landing firmly back on the other side of the counter.
CLOSEUP of his feet landing hard, just as before.
The register opens. Mariachi shrugs, smiles, and reaches into
the register, taking his money out himself. He counts it.
After a brief consideration, he decides to leave the old man
a tip. Mariachi waves a "good-bye" wave and dances out. The
old man, still standing there with his arms outstretched as
if he was robbed, dashes to the phone and calls Moco's men.
The bar Assistant is cleaning the bar. He walks over to grab
a few glasses and when he returns, Azul is sitting at the
barstool Mariachi was on earlier. The Assistant looks around,
wondering where Azul appeared from.
The Assistant grabs a mug and starts to fill it at the tap.
He fills it halfway when...
He grabs a bottle and hands it to Azul, then lifts the mug,
toasts and drinks it straight down.
Azul drinks his straight down, too.
Azul takes out a few more bills and hands them to the
Assistant, and begins to stand up.
Mariachi is out on the streets, returning to Domino's.
As he crosses the street he notices Azul leaving the saloon
with a guitar case. Mariachi runs into the saloon.
Mariachi runs inside and checks to see if his case is still
there. Domino comes downstairs.
Azul is walking to his truck when he turns to a corner and
Mean Dude #4 sticks his gun in his face. Two more guns
appear, pointed at the back of his head.
Is this the guy?
The two Rats are in the blue truck half a block away. One
hits the other to look at what's happening to Azul.
POV of Rats seeing Azul with three guys around him with guns.
They look at each other, start the truck and speed away.
Mean Dude #4 takes the case and lays it flat in Azul's palms.
Mean Dude #4 unsnaps two of the latches, SNAP SNAP.
He unsnaps three more... SNAP... SNAP... SNAP!
He points the gun deep into Azul's face and cocks it. Azul
closes his eyes. Mean Dude #5 lifts the lid. Azul hears a
faint strumming sound, followed by the sound of the Mean Dude
slamming the case shut. Azul opens his eyes. The Mean Dude
resnaps the latches. SNAP... SNAP... SNAP-SNAP-SNAP!!!
They walk away leaving Azul wondering what happened.
Domino, Mariachi, and Assistant are standing at the bar.
He grabs the case and begins to take it to the stairs, but he
pauses for it feels different to him. He slowly looks down at
it.
Azul watches the Mean Dudes go and when tey turn the corner
he puts the case on the ground to open it.
The Mean Dudes are rounding the corner, but Mean Dude #5, who
is last, snaps his fingers and motions to the others to keep
quiet and to watch Azul
Mariachi shakes the case, and puts it on the counter as if to
open it... but he doesn't need to check it. He knows it's not
his guitar.
Mariachi looks at her startled, then runs out of the bar with
the case.
Mean Dudes are watching Azul unsnap his case.
Azul opens the lid, revealing Mariachi's guitar.
The Mean Dudes start walking towards Azul as the camera
tracks back with them. Azul slams the case shut, wondering
what the hell is going on. He looks up and notices the Mean
Dudes walking towards him. He stands up and slowly walks in
the other direction.
Mariachi is running through the streets and onto the
sidewalk.
The bad guys are pulling out their weapons.
Mariachi bolts around the corner. Now everyone is on the same
sidewalk. Mariachi and Azul are on each end of the street
with the Mean Dudes in between them.
Azul turns and sees Mariachi with his guitar case. Mean Dude
#5 turns and sees Mariachi, too.
The two other Mean Dudes exchange glances. Mean Dude #5
stalks after Mariachi, so the other two follow. Mariachi
looks to Azul for help. Azul tips the imaginary hat to
Mariachi and walks away.
Mariachi runs through the street almost getting hit. Bullets
are flying as the Mean Dudes are firing at him as they run.
Mariachi leaps up over a few cars and ends up in a dead end.
He turns around, drops the case on the ground and opens it. A
million weapons seem to stare back at him when he opens it.
He is frantic. He grabs a small gun, shakes it in his hand,
doesn't like the feel. He tosses it back in.
The Mean Dudes are barreling down the street. One turns
towards the dead end.
Mariachi pulls out the MAC-10 and blasts the first Mean Dude
he sees. He grabs the case and runs out into the street,
jumping onto a truck and blasting the other Mean Dude from up
there. He sees Mean Dude #5 run away.
Mariachi comes off the truck and walks through the streets in
slow motion. Peolple are staring at him as if he was Azul the
killer. Mariachi walks straight to the bar. A BOY is bouncing
a ball on one of the sidewalks.
The camera dollies past the vacant pool table, and over to a
Rat sitting in a chair, drinking a beer. The other Rat is
pacing back and forth in front of the sitting Rat. Azul
enters the room. Throwing his guitar case onto the pool table
as a grand entrance gesture. The sitting Rat stands beside
the pacing Rat.
Rat #2 nods in agreement. Azul unsnaps one of the latches.
He opens the case and the guitar sparkles at them. The Rats
exchange glances. They look at the guitar then back at Azul.
The two Rats are about to leave.
Both Rats take out their guns. Azul takes Rat #2's gun.
The Rats exchange glances, then aim their eyes back to the
floor. Azul turns to Rat #2.
Azul gestures to Rat #2.
Rat #1 turns to Rat #2 who is in shock.
Azul aims his gun at Rat #1, who immediately aims his gun at
Rat #2. Rat #2 is sweating bullets. Rat #1 puts his gun down.
Rat #2 glances back and forth between Rat #1 and Azul.
Azul puts his gun down and motions the rats to leave. They
leave. When they exit, Rat #1 turns to Rat #2 and snaps his
fingers. Rat #2 shakes his hand. They leave.
Domino is dabbing hydrogen peroxide onto a cotton swab. She
applies it to Mariachi's body scars on his back. Mariachi has
his eyes closed. He washes the blood from his face.
Mean Dude #5 comes in and approaches Moco.
Moco takes out a cigarette and puts it in his mouth.
Moco takes out a match.
Moco lights his match across Mean Dude #5's face and lights
his cigarette. Mean Dude #5 walks away, as Moco flicks his
match at him in slow motion.
Mariachi is about to lay on the floor. She tosses him a
blanket.
The phone rings. Domino gets up to answer it. Mariachi
reaches under his blanket for a small mirror and combs his
hair, putting spit in his hair to slick it down. He quickly
stashes the mirror.
Moco is sitting at a table playing cards.
She hangs up.
Domino walks over to the counter and picks up a key.
Mariachi laughs.
She sits next to Mariachi.
They kiss. She gets up and is about to turn off the lights.
Domino laughs.
Domino hands Mariachi a wad of money.
Mariachi sees the money and looks up at her bewildered.
Mariachi starts to put up his hand as if to refuse it.
Mariachi stops and thinks... He looks up at her
questioningly, then he shrugs an "OK" and grabs the money and
jogs out excitedly. Domino is smiling.
Mariachi walks down the sidewalk, passing curioso shops. The
camera is low and zoomed in all the way. Mariachi stops by
one of the window that has a guitar in the glass. He pulls
his money and counts it. He stops after he notices someone's
reflection in the window. He turns around and sees it is Mean
Dude #5 right across the street. He meets up with another
Mean Dude. They are standing right behind Mariachi. Mariachi
is pretending to still look at the window. The Mean Dudes
walk past Mariachi so Mariachi walks in the opposite
direction. Mean Dude #5 stops and then turns around slowly.
Far zoomed shot of Mariachi walking down the street with guys
behind him. They start after him.
Tracking shot following Mariachi.
Tracking shot in front of Mean Dudes walking at Mariachi.
Mean Dude #5 pulls out a small walkie-talkie and calls his
buddy in the truck a block away.
LOCO starts the truck and starts driving slowly across the
street. As he turns on the corner, Mariachi sees the truck
and casually climbs inside and hides in the back. Mean Dude
#5 turns the corner when whispers into walkie-talkie.
Mean Dude #5 laughs.
Mean Dude #5 taps his buddy and they start running down the
block.
Mariachi is in back the truck searching for a weapon. The
truck stops. Mariachi rolls to the side and gently lifts his
head.
POV Mariachi sees the two Mean Dudes walking at him. Mariachi
turns and Loco is there to knock him in the face with the
rifle butt. Mariachi falls into truck, blood trickling from
his dizzying head. He tries to get up a bit, but Loco is in
the truck now, and slams the rifle down into his face hard...
Blackout.
Mariachi is unconcious in the back of Loco's truck. Mean Dude
#5 and other Mean Dudes are riding in back with Mariachi.
The above scene intercuts back and forth with the arrival of
Loco. Loco arrives at the gate, Mean Dude #5 opens the gate,
they drive through. The truck is facing Moco so he can't see
Mariachi yet. Mean Dude #5 closes the gate and walks over to
the truck, opens the back door, and calls Moco over. Moco
walks over to the truck and looks inside.
Mariachi is laying there unconcious, Moco puts his arm around
Mean Dude #5, who is looking very proud, and Moco pulls out a
cigarette and a match.
Moco strikes the match behind Mean Dude #5's head. Mean Dude
#5 stops smiling.
Domino is waiting on customers. She glances at her watch. A
few seconds later she glances at it again. She looks very
worried.
Azul's Rats burst into the hideout. FOUR GIRLS pop up over
the partition with guns. The Rats stop in their tracks. The
girls sigh a "oh, it's them" sigh and slink back to bed. Top
shot of them trying to wake Azul. Azul wakes up and looks
over the partition.
Azul thinks a moment. He stands up.
Azul dresses, smiling...
Mariachi is in a holding cell at the ranch. He twitches,
finally waking up.
He sees a GUARD outside and finds a way to escape.
He grabs the guard's assault rifle and turns a corner. Two
men grab him. He slams the butt of the rifle, knocking the
wind and teeth out of BAD GUY #1, then he kicks down and
breaks the shin bone of BAD GUY #2 who screams out in agony.
Mariachi silences him by karate punching his throat. The Bad
Guy gurgles and hits the ground.
Angle from the ground as Mariachi smashes the guy with is
gun.
He crawls up a wall, trying to escape as quietly as he can.
He sees TWO MORE MEN running towards him since they heard
some noise. Mariachi aims his assault rifle at the blue Chevy
parked behind him. He fires and it explodes.
Mariachi jumps Loco, gets him to drive him to the saloon. He
also takes Loco's money.
Azul walks into frame, looks around then proceeds into the
bar.
Azul goes inside and finds Domino tending the bar.
She grabs a bottle and slams it down on the counter unopened.
He eyes her admirably and then pops the top with one hand.
He guzzles the drink, slamming it down empty.
Domino grabs another beer for him and runs to get the case.
(In between this time, Mariachi escapes with Loco.)
She returns, slamming it to the floor.
Domino calls her Assistant.
They leave. The Assistant tends to the bar.
They drive out to Moco's ranch in Azul's truck. Little do
they know, they passed Loco's truck with Mariachi crouched in
the passenger seat. He gets up after the truck passes.
Mariachi didn't know it was Domino in Azul's truck or he
could have turned around and kept her from going to Moco's
ranch.
They arrive at the gate and het out of the truck.
Azul grabs Domino and points a gun to her head. He whispers
to her...
He kicks at the gate.
The gate opens and we see Moco standing at a three-quarter
stance, flanked with his men on both sides. Azul drags Domino
in and faces her at Moco with a gun to her head.
Azul cocks the pistol.
Moco signals his men to get the money.
Azul is glancing between Domino and Moco.
Azul is anxious now.
Moco pulls out his gun and shoots her in the heart. She falls
limp in Azul's arms. Azul tries hold her up, but she's dead.
Azul rests her on the ground, looking down at her, wondering
why it's all come to this.
Azul slowly looks at Moco.
Moco shoots Azul in the heart. Azul had his hands to his
side, and now he falls to his knees. Moco shoots him again,
and Azul dies next to Domino.
Mean Dude #5 is exchanging glances with the others. No one
seems to be on Moco's side.
Mariachi is still in Loco's truck.
Loco stops the truck and Mariachi gets out. Loco drives back
when Mariachi motions for him to leave. Mariachi watches him
go then dashes around the corner to the saloon.
Mariachi runs into the bar...
The Assistant rushes over to Mariachi.
Mariachi is about to race upstairs.
Mariachi tries to make sense of it all for a minute before
grabbing the gun from under the counter and rushing upstairs.
INT. DOMINO'S LOFT - DAY Mariachi grabs the key to the
motorcycle and runs out. The motorcycle burns down the road.
Mariachi barrels down the road on the motorcycle.
Moco is walking away from the bodies.
Some men go to check.
Cut back and forth with Mariachi coming.
Mariachi rides through the semi-open gate... stopping at the
bodies. He dismounts the bike and holds Domino.
He has the gun in the back of his pants. You can see it while
his back is to the camera and men are approaching him. Moco
comes for the show.
Mariachi slowly lifts his eyes to Moco.
Mariachi stands, hands up.
Mariachi says nothing.
Moco fires into Mariachi's left hand. Mariachi grimaces,
crumbling to the floor. He keeps a tight grip on his hand.
When he opens his hand to see the damage, the camera can see
right through his hand for a reverse shot of his face through
the hole.
Moco is laughing and looking at his men for support, but no
one else laughs. Mariachi tries to stand, but he falls back.
When he rises again he has the gun in his hand. He shoots
Moco in the chest. Moco falls back and hits the ground hard.
He gasps for air...
Moco's men gather around him. Mean Dude #5 crouches down to
check Moco's throat pulse. Moco's dead. Mean Dude #5 strikes
a match across Moco's face and lights up a cigarette. He
turns and walks away. The others follow.
Mariachi wraps a tourniquet on his arm, kisses Domino, opens
Azul's case, sees the weapons, and rides off with it.
He looks back at the town behind him, then places his hand on
the motorcycle to drive off. We notice the metal brace on his
hand.
Mariachi rides into the sunset road. He speeds pas a sign:
"ACUNA 18 miles"
"Coming soon

FULL SHOT. The sun, spinning up from behind the dark rim of
eastern hills, is bleaching the cloudless, morning sky. This
is volcanic country, barren, desolate, forbidding. There is
no sign of life, no sound. Then on a distant hill, a man
appears, to be followed by two others. They walk steadily
forward.
MED. SHOT. A dry watercourse threads its way through the cut
in the treeless hills. The sun is not high enough as yet to
drive night from the canyon. A man appears around a bend;
another and still another. They are McCall, Peters and Lednov,
clad in prison clothes, hatless, their heads closely cropped.
As Lednov's face comes into a closeup,
LONG SHOT - DOWN ANGLE. A narrow valley lies below. Through
it runs a cottonwood-bordered stream. Smoke curls up out of
the trees. Horses graze in a small meadow near the creek.
From O.O. comes the SOUND of heavy boots crunching across
the dry, eroded earth. The three men file past camera to
stop in the immediate F.g. and look down into the valley.
They exchange glances and start down.
MED. SHOT - ANGLED THROUGH willows. A bearded man, Cal
Forster, and two young fellows in their late teens squat
beside a campfire eating breakfast. O.s. there is the SOUND
of movement. Lednov moves cautiously into the scene. He has
a revolver in his hand.
Forster turns toward camera and fear comes into his
expression. Lednov fires. Forster crumples near the fire.
The two boys jump to their feet and reach for rifles. Lednov
fires again and again. McCall and Peters come into the scene,
both firing revolvers.
MED SHOT - ANGLED ACROSS campfire. On the fire smoulders the
prison clothes the convicts had worn. Smoke spirals up. In
the B.B. Lednov, Peters and McCall, now wearing the clothes
of the three Forsters, saddle the horses. CAMERA PANS AROUND
and ANGLES DOWN. The bodies of Forster and his sons, now
clad in underwear are sprawled by the fire. Forster's arm
lies close to the smouldering clothing.
MED. LONG SHOT. Smoke climbs above the trees. Into the
clearing ride the three convicts, to cross it and move
westward. They disappear over the hill. A dust cloud marks
their passage. CAMERA HOLDS ON the scene and over the shot
comes the MAIN TITLE CARD:
LONG SHOT. A buckboard drawn by two horses comes along the
road. Graham, a middle-aged rancher, is driving. As the horses
trot forward and dust rises above the road, the NEXT TITLE
CARD is shown.
LONG SHOT - DOWN ANGLE. Graham's buckboard moves down the
road toward the clearing, as the TITLE CARDS follow and
change. When the buckboard reaches the creek, the LAST TITLE
CARD is ended.
MED. SHOT. Graham drives the horses through the creek and
into the meadow. Through the trees the Forster camp can be
seen. Graham glances over, then suddenly pulls on the reins.
As the horses stop, he twists the reins around the whip stock,
grabs his rifle from under the seat, leaps out and hurries
forward toward the camp.
MED. SHOT. Graham hurries through the trees to stop in horror
near the dead men. Then very slowly he moves forward to the
smouldering fire. Stooping he lifts Forster's arm away from
the fire, then picks up one of the prison coats and looks at
it.
MED. LONG SHOT. The surrounding hills are covered with scrub
pinon pine and mesquite. Graham's buckboard, moving slowly
up a hill, passes camera, which PANS WITH it. In the bed,
covered by a tarp, are the three bodies. The narrow, one-way
road climbs easily up the gentle hill. Beyond, a dust cloud
rises. As Graham's buckboard nears the crest, a surrey appears
and starts down. Graham pulls his team into the bank, trying
to make room for the surrey.
There are four women in the two-seated surrey, which is
heavily loaded with trunks, hatboxes, etc. Mary Wells, the
loveliest of the four, is driving. She is more poised, more
self-assured than the others. Her clothes, though a trifle
showy, are attractive. She wears a large spectacular hat.
Helen Carter, showier, harder and more cynical, sits beside
her. In the seat behind are Marcia Paine, placid, younger
looking than her years, and Elaine Ross, a striking blonde
with a pale haunted face. Elaine is obviously ill. Mary is
riding the brake and holding the team back.
SHOOTING PAST Graham.
He jerks on the reins and tries to make room for the surrey.
A steep bank is on camera left. On camera right, the road
drops off into a gulley. As the surrey comes up Mary reins
the team in. The women all look frightened. Graham, trying
to force his team to pull the vehicle up the bank, is too
occupied to recognize the women at once. Having made just
enough room for the surrey, he turns and looks at the women.
Mary looks ahead at the narrow road and the canyon to her
left.
Graham jumps over the wheel.
Graham reaches the surrey.
She climbs out. Marcia looks at the narrow space ahead.
Elaine leans back against the cushions and shakes her head.
Helen is out on the road now. Mary has moved over and Graham
picks up the reins. Marcia gives up and jumps out.
He releases the brake.
Mary isn't listening. She is looking at the road. Elaine
closes her eyes. Helen and Marcia scurry back out of the
way.
Adroitly he drives the surrey past.
featuring buckboard. Helen and Marcia start along the road
past the buckboard. Helen stops and looks at its cargo in
horror. She grabs Marcia's arm. The girls look at each other
and hurry after the surrey which has stopped below the
buckboard.
on surrey. Graham jumps out.
Helen and Marcia hurry up. Marcia motions back.
The women exchange glances. Elaine is sitting up, her eyes
open.
As Mary speaks, Helen pushes Marcia into the surrey and climbs
up beside Mary.
Mary unwraps the reins from the whipstock.
Mary releases the brake and the surrey starts rolling forward.
The surrey starts down the hill. Graham looks after it, then
turns to go back to the buckboard, CAMERA PANNING WITH him.
The town lies in a lush green valley. It is surrounded by
meadowland and shaded by cottonwoods, alders and aspen. In
the F.g. Graham's buckboard moves fast down hill.
FULL SHOT. In the F.g. a smallish crowd, mostly men and
children idle in the street in front of Mary Wells' Gambling
and Dance Hall. The wooden sidewalk is cluttered with those
articles belonging to the women that were too bulky to get
into the surrey. Several women stand on the porch supervising
the locking up of the place and the removal of the sign of
Mary Wells' name on it. Graham's buckboard rounds a corner
at a fast trot. He slows the team to let the people get out
of the way.
The team has slowed to a walk. The people give their attention
to the buckboard. A boy clambers up over the tailboard, sees
the cargo and jumps off with a frightened yell. The crowd
turns from the dance hall and follows the buckboard leaving
the women and their pious male assistants on the porch.
MED. FULL SHOT - ANGLED to include blacksmith shop across
the street. Far down the street comes Graham's buckboard
followed by the small crowd. The sheriff's office is a one-
story wooden structure. Next to it is the general store. In
front of the blacksmith shop stands a wagon with one wheel
off. In the corral alongside are eleven blooded mares. Clay
Phillips, his brother Steve and the blacksmith are inside
the shop. Clay's saddle horse is tethered to the hitching
rail beside two harnessed work horses.
ANGLED to include sheriff's office. The blacksmith, Sam Ellis,
an elderly bent man in a leather apron stands at the forge
in which he is heating the rim from the big wheel which lies
on the table nearby. Clay, a long-legged wrangler in clean
but faded work clothes stands near the forge pumping the
bellows and watching his brother, a freckled kid of sixteen
trying to roll a cigarette. Steve has progressed to the most
difficult step, that of licking and sealing the paper. Clay
reaches over and takes it from him. He puts the skinny
cylinder in his mouth and Steve lights it for him. The first
third of the cigarette burns with one quick flare.
Sam lifts the rim to the wheel.
Clay, the cigarette dangling from his lips, moves over to
the table, picks up a hammer and helps Sam hammer the rim on
the wheel. Steve stands watching.
Together they lift the wheel and plunge it into the tub of
water. Steam rises to fill the blackened shed.
Clay and Sam spin the wheel in the tub.
From O.s. comes the SOUND of the approaching buckboard and
crowd. Steve hears the noise and moves to the front of the
shed.
MED. FULL SHOT - Steve's angle. Graham pulls his buckboard
up, jumps out and hurries into the sheriff's office. Some
kids run up to stand on the porch chattering excitedly.
Members of the crowd straggle up.
ANGLED PAST Steve. Clay comes up to stand beside Steve. Sam
joins them. Steve looks up at Clay hopefully.
Clay and Steve exit. Sam looks after them, shrugs disgustedly
and goes back to the wheel.
MED. SHOT - featuring buckboard. The crowd around the wagon
stands in shocked silence looking at the bodies under the
tarp. Clay and steve come up, glance in the buckboard and
then at each other. Clay speaks to a man near him.
The sheriff calls from O.s.
Sheriff Gardner, who has seen Clay through the window, comes
out of his office on to the porch followed by Jeb Graham and
a young deputy. In his hand Gardner holds the burned prison
jacket. Clay goes up the steps to the porch. Steve follows
to the foot of the steps to stand watching. The crowd around
the wagon gives its attention to the men on the porch.
Gardner is neatly dressed with his star hidden under his
coat. His deputy wears jeans, shirt, and leather jacket.
He pauses to let that sink in.
Gardner holds out the burned jacket.
Clay moves over to glance down at the jacket.
From his pocket, Gardner takes several communications, thumbs
through them and passes one over. It is a telegram, of the
period.
Clay reads it.
BE ADVISED OF ESCAPE OF LEDNOV, PETERS AND McCALL CONVICTED
BACK TO SCENE. Clay hands the telegram back.
Clay nods.
He turns toward the steps.
Clay speaks over his shoulder as he goes down.
As Clay starts away, Steve follows him. Clay doesn't cross
to the blacksmith shop. He goes along the sidewalk toward
the general store. Steve hurries to catch up with him.
MOVING SHOT. Clay, deep in thought, seems unaware of his
brother at his side.
They walk in silence to the General store and Clay goes up
the steps and across the porch. Steve follows close behind.
The store is a typical general store of the period, selling
everything from buggies to baby clothes. In one corner is
the postoffice. The storekeeper, Hayes, is unpacking a case
of canned goods, stacking the cans on the shelf. Clay,
followed by Steve, enters. Hayes glances over.
Clay crosses to the shelf where the rifle and shotgun shells
are kept and takes down a half dozen boxes of 30 30
cartridges.
Besides Clay, Steve is inspecting a rack of guns.
Steve picks up a rifle, puts it to his shoulder and squints
along the barrel.
He pulls the hammer back and snaps the trigger. Hayes comes
across and takes the gun from him.
He hands Hayes some money for the shells. Hayes crosses to
another part of the store to get change. Clay and Steve, who
has picked up the rifle again, move over to the counter.
Clay grins. Hayes comes up with the change. Clay takes out
some bills and gives them to the storekeeper.
Steve's expression shows his gratitude and delight. He covers
up with banter.
He puts one of the boxes of shells on the end of the counter.
He reaches down into one of the barrels in front of the
counter. The barrels are filled with beans, nails, dried
apples, hardtack, etc. Clay takes a handful of beans and
makes a trail ending in a little pile.
He puts another box of shells on the other side of the
counter.
He runs a trail of beans away from "Aspen" toward the end of
the counter. He runs another trail from "Alder Crick" to
cross the Aspen trail. He puts another box of shells on the
far end of the counter.
He reaches down without looking and brings up a hardtack.
Clay drops the hardtack back from where the bean trails cross.
He holds out his hand and Hayes hands him his change.
Steve tucks his gun under his arm. As he passes the counter,
he picks up the hardtack and starts eating it.
MED. SHOT - ANGLED TOWARD Sheriff's office. Up the street
men are gathering around the sheriff's office. Some are
mounted. Some are tightening their cinches. Clay and Steve
come out of the store to look up the street. Steve munches
the hardtack.
He glances at the remaining piece of hardtack and then pitches
it away.
Clay laughs. As they start up the street, the sheriff mounts
his horse and, followed by his men, rides forward.
CLOSE SHOT. A woman's hat lies on the rocky earth. It is a
big, elaborate affair. O.s. there is the SOUND of hoofbeats,
the SQUEAL of a wagon brake and the JANGLE of harness. CAMERA
PULLS BACK and ANGLE WIDENS to reveal Clay's wagon coming
down a very steep hill. Steve is driving, holding tightly to
the reins and riding the brake. Seeing the hat, he yells to
Clay.
Clay rides over and, swinging down, picks it up.
ANGLED DOWN hill. The road twists tortuously down. Near the
bottom it swings sharply at right angles into a dry wash.
The banks shut out further view of the road. Near where the
road turns a trunk lies at the side. It has broken open and
some of the contents are spilled out in the dust. Clay rides
to it, reins in his horse and looks down. Steve, with
difficulty, pulls the mules to a stop alongside.
featuring trunk and wagon. Clay swings out of his saddle,
starts tossing the clothes back in the trunk. Steve jumps
down.
Steve holds up a petticoat close to his body and grins.
Clay takes it from him, puts it in the trunk and shuts the
lid. Steve helps him hoist the trunk into the wagon bed.
Steve gets back in the seat. Just as Clay is about to mount,
he stops and picks up a small folding daguerrotype case
delicately ornamented. He lifts his eyebrow, tucks the case
into his pocket, then mounts and starts ahead around the
bend.
Clay's ANGLE. Ahead, off the road in the wash is the surrey
that passed Graham's buckboard at the fork. Clay spurs his
horse forward.
on surrey. The back wheel is broken and the bed of the surrey
rests on the ground. The horses have been taken from the
traces and stand dejectedly in the hot sun. A blanket is
spread in the scant shade thrown by the surrey. On it lies
Elaine and, sitting beside her, is Marcia. A damp cloth is
spread across Elaine's forehead. A water bag hangs from the
surrey. Elaine's head is pillowed on a dainty satin cushion.
Helen and Mary have risen at Clay's approach and now stand
by the road.
Clay gallops forward to pull up near the surrey. In the b.g.
Steve drives the wagon around the bend. Clay dismounts.
Clay drops his reins and hurries up.
Clay bends over Elaine.
Clay turns from Elaine and gives his attention to the surrey.
on rear of surrey. In the B.g. Steve pulls the wagon to a
stop, jumps off, and comes running over.
Helen moves toward Clay. She miles without humor.
Clay stops her with a look, goes around, and kicks the
unbroken back wheel. The spokes rattle.
She looks at him to see if the name registers.
Steve tugs at his battered hat.
Mary and Helen exchange glances.
Clay takes the makings from his pocket, starts to roll a
cigarette.
Steve looks at Clay hopefully. He likes the prospect of having
these lovely women along.
Clay finishes the cigarette, starts to put the makings back.
Mary holds out her hand. Clay gives her the makings. Mary
speaks as she casually rolls a cigarette.
Clay motions to the remuda that grazes in the b.g.
Mary has finished rolling her cigarette. She passes the bag
to Helen, who starts rolling one.
Helen has finished her cigarette. She passes the makings to
Steve. He hesitates, looks at his brother and, when he sees
Clay is occupied with Mary, starts rolling one.
Steve finishes his cigarette. Again he hesitates, then not
wanting to seem young in front of these women he takes a
bold step and lights it. Clay reaches over and takes it from
him. Mary watches the byplay.
Steve, embarrassed and hurt, turns quickly away. Helen looks
after the boy.
He lifts some things out of the surrey and carries them toward
the wagon.
She starts around the surrey. Helen follows.
Clay bends over Elaine.
As Clay turns from Elaine, Marcia joins the other two, their
attention on Clay and the surrey. Left alone, Elaine is
suddenly alert and no longer sick. She glances around, then
unobserved slides out from under the shade of the surrey.
on rear of surrey. In the B.g. Steve pulls the wagon to a
stop, jumps off, and comes running over. Elaine stands for a
moment, searching the ground with her eyes.
Helen moves toward Clay. She smiles without humor. With this
new diversion, Elaine, still unnoticed, starts away -- back
toward where they dropped the trunk.
Elaine stops now and turns as Clay takes the folding
daguerrotype case from his pocket. Elaine, her eyes wide and
frightened, starts back as Mary takes the case from Clay and
opens it.
She jerks the case from Mary's hands, snaps it shut, and
stands staring at Mary with a strange mixture of fright,
anger and hysteria. Mary glances around as if to say what-
did-I-do? To cover the embarrassed silence, Clay kicks the
unbroken back wheel. The spokes rattle.
Elaine glances at him as though he had insulted her, turns
and starts toward the blanket again.
She looks at him to see if the name registers. At the surrey
side, Elaine is abruptly weak again. She leans against it
for support. Mareia moves to her as she slides back down on
the blanket, clutching the case.
Steve tugs at his battered hat.
Mary and Helen come around the end of the surrey to where
Elaine lies. Mary bends beside the sick girl and lifts the
cloth from the girl's forehead.
The sick girl sits up. She looks around her dully.
Assisted by Mary, Elaine gets to her feet. Mary puts her arm
around her.
Elaine stops. She looks fearfully up at Helen.
She tries to lead the girl toward the wagon.
She pulls the girl with her toward the wagon.
on wagon. Clay, in the wagon bed, is stowing his gear in the
back. Mary, supporting Elaine, reaches the wagon. Seeing the
girls, Clay reaches down and gently lifts Elaine up. Mary
climbs in beside him.
wagon bed. Clay has unrolled a bedroll under the seat where
there is a little shade.
As she speaks, Mary helps the girl down under the seat, then
rises to face Clay.
Elaine as she hears the name. She is shocked.
Clay and Mary. Clay vaults out of the wagon, CAMERA ANGLE
WIDENS, he looks up.
He turns away and hurries back to the surrey.
FULL SHOT. Dust rises over the road as the cavalcade moves
forward. Clay, rifle across his lap, rides in front. The
wagon, with Mary driving and Helen beside her on the seat,
follows. The two horses that pulled the surrey are tied to
the tail gate. Then comes the remuda with Steve bringing up
the rear.
Marcia and Elaine. PROCESS. Marcia sits in the bed of the
wagon looking back. Elaine lies under the seat.
Steve. Steve proudly carries his new rifle across his lap.
He whistles happily as he scans the desert country hopefully
for the enemy.
FULL SHOT. Long shadows of the hills lie on the grassy meadow
along the stream that is bordered by cottonwoods and willows.
A knoll overlooks the camp site. The caravan can be seen as
it halts in the lush grass a few yards from the stream. The
girls sit lifelessly on the wagon; they seem too tired to
dismount. Then, finally, Marcia helps Elaine to climb stiffly
down. With the exception of Mary they all let themselves
down in the grass. Mary walks to the head of the team and
starts fumbling with the harness. Steve comes into the scene,
dismounts quickly and pulls the saddle off his horse. The
remuda has fanned out, the horses moving toward the water.
Steve crosses to Mary and takes over the job of unbuckling
the harness. Mary smiles gratefully and rubs her hand across
her face.
Steve straightens, looks towards the horses and moves off.
He speaks to Mary over his shoulder.
Mary smiles after him, then moves across the grass, CAMERA
DOLLYING AHEAD of her. She sinks to her knees in the patch
of sand by the stream and leans down and puts her face under
the water. Then, sitting up, she wipes the water and dust
from her face with a handkerchief. Clay rides up from behind,
dismounts, scoops up some water from the river in the brim
of his hat and drinks it. For a second he watches Mary.
Mary's manner is business-like. She and the girls are along
for the ride. She wants no favors -- wants to do her part.
He turns and leads his horse back to the wagon, stands there
unsaddling it. Mary rises.
She starts downstream.
ANGLED PAST wagon. Clay tosses the saddle into the wagon
bed, slaps his mare on the rump. She trots off. Climbing up
on the wheel, he gets the grub box under the seat and lifts
it down. Steve comes from out of scene and starts unharnessing
the team.
Clay comes past him, carrying the grub box. He puts it down
near where some stones make a crude firebox.
Clay squats by the stones and starts building a fire.
He fans the small flame with his hat. Steve leads the mules
down toward the stream.
ANGLED PAST Clay. In the B.g. Steve stands by the stream,
letting the team drink. O.s. the women can be heard laughing
and splashing. Steve gives all his attention to what is going
on downstream. Clay puts wood on the fire, opens the grub
box. He sees Steve, takes the coffee pot out of the box and
heads for the stream.
ANGLED PAST Steve downstream. Behind the willows the girls
are bathing. However they are too far away to be seen clearly
and the willows make a fairly effective screen. Clay walks
upstream and fills the coffee pot, then comes back to stand
for a moment beside Steve. Steve, who hadn't seen Clay until
now, suddenly gets very busy giving all his attention to the
mules.
He jerks them from the water and leads them away. Clay frowns
after him, then goes back to the wagon.
on wagon and fire. As Clay passes the wagon, he reaches into
the bed and gets a couple of strips of scrap iron. These he
carries to the fire. He puts the iron strips across the blaze,
sets the coffee pot on, feeds the fire with some more wood,
then going back to the wagon, he takes his rifle out, throws
a shell into the chamber and starts off up the knoll.
MED. SHOT. It is a moonlight night. Clay squats on his heels,
smoking. The rifle lies across his knees. Below can be seen
the campfire, and the shadowy forms of the girls as with
Steve's help they make up a bed under the wagon and cook the
evening meal. Clay suddenly reacts as O.s. a horse whinnies.
Standing he looks off into the darkness.
ANGLED PAST Clay. In the moonlight the trail stretches back
over rolling hills. Faintly can be heard the SOUND of
hoofbeats. Below, where the remuda grazes, a horse whinnies
again. Clay moves down toward the camp.
the camp. As Clay approaches. Steve squats by the fire. He
has spread out a tarp in the circle of firelight and Mary is
setting the tin plates, cups, etc., out. Elaine, a blanket
around her, sits near the fire. She looks tired and ill.
Marcia and Helen are struggling with bed-making under the
wagon.
Steve and Mary look up as Clay strides up. Clay starts kicking
dirt over the fire.
Steve jumps up and hurries to the wagon. Clay continues
kicking dirt over the fire.
LONG SHOT - ANGLES PAST horseman. The horseman, who has been
approaching from the east, tops a rise and looks off at the
camp. He is a shadowy figure in the palo dark. For a moment,
as the fire still blazes, figures are visible in the camp.
Then the fire goes out. The horseman dismounts, pulling his
rifle from his scabbard. Moving to his horse's head he puts
a hand on the animal's nostrils. He looks toward the camp
for a moment then starts cautiously along the road.
MED. SHOT - ANGLED THROUGH willows PAST Clay and Steve. The
brothers have taken up a post overlooking the road. The
horseman walks cautiously toward them. He stops, listening.
Then he drops his reins and comes forward stealthily. The
horse stands.
Clay and Steve. Steve, finger on trigger gives Clay a
questioning glance. Clay shakes his head.
on road. The man, now seen clearly for the first time, stops.
He is Jim Clayton, a man in his twenties, chunky, round-faced,
stolid and not too imaginative. He wears the well-worn jeans
and blue shirt of the farmer. Clay and Steve come out of the
willows toward him. Both have their rifles ready.
Clayton hesitates, then lets his rifle butt drop to the road.
Clay and Steve lower their rifles.
Clay moves closer and extends his hand. They shake.
Steve shakes Jim's hand.
Clayton turns back toward his horse. Clay and Steve wait for
him.
MED. SHOT - ANGLED BACK ALONG the trail. Mary and Helen,
tense and worried, stand at the edge of the camp, looking
off. Marcia is with Elaine under the wagon. From o.s. comes
the SOUND of men's voices. Clay, Steve and Clayton, leading
his horse, come into view.
Marcia kneeling on the tarp by Elaine, is staring ahead.
Suddenly her face lights up. She springs to her feet.
Clay, Steve and Jim are now close to Mary.
Hearing his voice, Marcia runs toward them.
Marcia throws herself into Jim's arms.
Clayton kisses her.
Marcia hugs him. In the B.g. Clay goes over to the fire,
kicks the dirt off the embers and piles on wood. The fire
flares up.
Mary and Helen.
CAMERA ANGLE WIDENS as Marcia and Jim come forward. The fire
now burns briskly. Clay rejoins the group.
Mary speaks before Jim can answer.
The joy goes out of Marcia's expression. She looks up at
Jim, her eyes begging him to tell her it will work. Jim, a
naturally shy man, loses his tongue momentarily. Clay jumps
into the breach.
Mary turns on Clay.
Clay and Mary. The others in the b.g.
CAMERA ANGLE WIDENS as he turns back to the fire, embarrassed
by the spot he's in, and throws wood on it, Mary watching
him. Steve comes over to Mary.
Clay swings around and comes back.
Clay gives Steve a gentle push. Steve exits.
Jim, his arm around Marcia, moves closer. Helen is in the
B.g., watching.
Taking her arm he leads her to where the horse stands at the
edge of the camp.
featuring Marcia and Jim. In the B.g. Mary comes after them.
Jim and Marcia turn.
Marcia comes over to hug Mary. As Marcia and Jim leave, Mary
moves to Clay.
MED. SHOT. Mary stands in the moonlight by the wagon, looking
out across the meadow. Below, near the creek, the horses
graze. There is the soft jangle of a bell as the bell mare
moves her head. Clay comes walking up from the creek, rifle
in hand. He passes without noticing Mary. Mary turns.
Mary in close F.g. The campfire burns low. Steve lies on his
stomach close to it. Clay stops beside him to glance down,
then moves on to sit on a rock above the fire. Mary starts
toward the fire.
Steve. Open in front of him is a copy of Leslie's Weekly, a
woman's journal: pictures of baby basinettes, whale-bone
corsets, fancy oil lamps, etc. Mary comes into scene to stand
above him, looking down. Steve glances up and smiles.
ANGLED DOWN PAST Clay.
She glances up where Clay sits.
Clay. He listens, perturbed.
Mary and Steve.
Clay. He winces at!
Mary, Steve and Clay. Behind them, Clay rises and comes down
nearer the fire.
She gives him a quick look of inquiry.
Steve looks up, then rises reluctantly.
Steve exits. Mary looks after him, then up at Clay.
Clay kicks loose embers into the fire.
Clay turns from the fire to stand above her.
He pauses, looking down.
Clay moves out of the circle of firelight to stop and pick
up his rifle, tarp and blanket, then climbs the knoll. Mary
stares into the fire, then rising she starts toward the wagon.
MED. SHOT. Clay reaches the top of the knoll and stands
looking off. Below him the campfire burns low. Mary reaches
the wagon.
MED. SHOT ANGLED PAST Mary TOWARD Clay. Mary stops, looking
up. A match flares as Clay lights a cigarette. O.s. there is
the SOUND of the bell mare's bell, the SOUND of horses moving
restlessly. Mary turns, looks under the wagon.
Elaine is gone. Helen is asleep. Mary drops to her knees on
the tarp and shakes Helen in wakefulness.
Helen sits up and looks over at Elaine's side of the bed.
Mary straightens, moves down past the wagon, CAMERA PANNING
WITH her. She calls softly.
Clay. He looks down toward the wagon as Mary calls Elaine's
name again, this time louder.
Clay frowns, pitches his cigarette away and starts down toward
the wagon.
Steve. He is sitting up, pulling on his boots. From under
the bedclothes he takes his rifle and starts toward the wagon.
wagon. Clay stands with Mary at the wagon as Steve comes up.
Helen is sitting up in bed, a comforter pulled around her.
She starts away into the darkness.
Mary turns back.
Clay picks up his saddle and bridle.
He starts down toward the meadow. Steve follows. Helen
scrambles out from under the wagon.
Clay stops by the creek. Behind him the fire smoulders near
the wagon. Mary's shadowy figure can be seen climbing the
knoll where Clay's bedroll is. Helen is near the fire.
Steve nods and splashes across the creek to follow the road
leading west. Clay starts toward the meadow where the horses
graze.
MED. SHOT. Steve moves slowly along the road away from camp.
He is scanning the dust for Elaine's footprints.
LONG SHOT - ANGLED PAST Mary. Mary stands on the knoll looking
off. Far below, in the meadow, Clay saddles his horse.
MED. SHOT. Clay swings into the saddle, and rides east. O.s.
Mary calls:
As the call echoes across the hills.
MED. SHOT. This is rough country, the rocky hills covered
sparsely with scrub pinon pine and brush. Steve stands on a
rise. He looks around for a moment, then turning starts back
down the slope. Suddenly he stops and listens, as from O.s.
comes the SOUND of distant sobbing.
Steve. He listens, trying to locate the sound then he hurries
down into a dry wash.
Steve crashes through the brush into the wash, to stop beside
Elaine who sits with her head buried in her arms, sobbing.
Steve and Elaine. Steve drops on his knees beside her. Elaine
doesn't look up. Steve shakes her.
Elaine doesn't move.
He pulls her up.
CAMERA ANGLE WIDENS as he tucks her arm in the crook of his
own and starts up the other side of the wash.
Steve, holding Elaine's arm, scrambles up the bank and through
the brush.
He stops and looks off. Faintly O.s. is heard the SOUND of
hoofbeats.
He shoves the girl down.
their ANGLE. Over a hill comes a horseman to be followed by
another and then a third.
Steve and Elaine.
Excitedly he swings the rifle to his shoulder and fires.
FULL SHOT - Clay reins his horse in and turns to look off in
the direction from which the shot came. Faintly o.s. another
shot echoes across the hills, then another and another. Clay
spurs his horse and gallops off.
Clay gallops up the hill to rein his horse in suddenly.
his ANGLE. Riding toward him are several horsemen. The horses
move at a walk. One carries a double burden. Steve walks
along behind. Clay spurs his horse and rides down toward
them.
Clay, in the B.g., comes down the hill. The horsemen, seven
of them, with Sheriff Gardner in the lead, followed by a
deputy, carrying Elaine in front of him, file past camera.
Steve, hands in his pockets, walks dejectedly in the dust
cloud kicked up by the horses.
featuring Clay and Gardner. Clay reins in his horse beside
Gardner, who also stops. The others rein in. Steve stops a
short distance away.
Clay rides closer. The deputy rides forward and lifts Elaine
into his arms. Clay settles her in front of him.
There are two rifles in his saddle holster. He pulls Steve's
out, hands it over.
Clay shoves it in his saddle holster.
He wheels his horse and rides off, followed by the others
Clay watches him go. Reluctantly Steve moves slowly up to
stand near Clay.
He reins his horse around.
Clay looks back.
EXTREME LONG SHOT. West are the Sierras and clouds are piled
in untidy heaps on the range. The dusty trail runs through
rolling country. Pinon pine and brush clothe the slopes. The
wagon and horses are the moving center of a white cloud of
dust.
Clay's party. Clay rides in the lead. The wagon follows and
Steve is riding beside the wagon. Behind is the remuda, and
the horses are straying off the road in search of grass.
wagon - (MOVING). Featuring Steve and Mary. Elaine lies under
the seat and Helen sits beside her. Steve is reciting the
alphabet to a simple melody usually sung by children of six
or seven.
Clay. He turns in his saddle where he rides ahead of the
team. He notices Steve riding at Mary's side and reins in
his horse.
Steve and Mary. Steve stops his letters. looks off. The wagon
moves up to Clay and stops.
Steve hesitates hoping he'll change his mind.
Steve wheels his horse and rides back. Mary looks over at
Clay.
He wheels his horse and rides after Steve.
Steve is driving the horses back into the road. Clay rides
up to help him. The horses fall in behind the wagon. Steve
takes up his position in the rear. Clay rides over beside
him.
They ride in silence for a moment.
One of the horses strays out of line and Clay rides out and
gets the animal back in the road. Then he returns to Steve.
Steve looks over at his brother and finds a wry grin.
Steve smiles warmly at him.
Cavalcade. It moves through dry barren hills. Far off, the
Sierras rise against the sky Thunder heads are piled in untidy
heaps on the range.
sky. Dark rain clouds blown by a high wind. SOUND of thunder.
rain -- the caravan. Clay leads it through a rain that has
filled the ruts in the trail, soaked the horses to glistening
black -- and obscures all view of the country through which
they are passing. SOUND of rain falling is loud. Clay and
Steve both wear slickers, gleaming from their shoulders to
the rumps of their horses. Mary, a tarp around her shoulders,
drives. Elaine and Helen huddle under a tarpaulin in the
wagon bed.
rain -- DOWN ANGLE -- wagon moving. Elaine sits up and, in
her delirium, throws off the tarp. Helen tries to pull her
down.
rain -- Clay. He wheels his horse at the SOUND of Helen's
voice and rides back through the rain toward the wagon.
rain -- wagon. Mary pulls on the reins and the mules stop.
Twisting them around the whip-stock, she swings back into
the wagon bed. She looks up at Clay.
In her anxiety, her tone is accusing. Clay drops the reins,
climbs into the wagon and bends down beside Elaine. He puts
his hand on her forehead.
rain - DOWN ANGLE - featuring Clay and Mary.
He starts fixing the tarp so it gives more protection to the
sick girl.
rain. Clay vaults out of the wagon and mounts his horse.
Mary rises and climbs back into the seat. She lashes the
mules with the reins. The wagon jolts forward.
rain - ANGLED ACROSS seat - (MOVING). Clay rides alongside.
Then, without a word, he strips off his slicker, tosses it
on the seat and rides off. Mary looks after him, then at the
slicker. She hesitates, not wanting to take favors from him.
Then she pulls the slicker around her. Taking the whip, she
hits the mules. CAMERA ANGLE WIDENS and CAMERA HOLDS. The
team breaks into a trot. The cavalcade moves away from camera
through drenching rain.
LONG SHOT - ANGLED THROUGH gate in barbed wire fence. The
ranch is nestled in a valley at the base of the Sierras.
Green meadowland surrounds the farm buildings which consist
of a cabin, barn and sheds, all in good repair and white-
washed, as are the corral fences and the picket fence around
the house, which stands in a clump of trees. The wind has
pushed the clouds back over the hills, but far off there is
still thunder. The gate in front f.g. is of barbed wire. It
is closed. On the fence post a board is tacked. Neatly
lettered on the board is the name:
From o.s. comes the SOUND of horses moving restlessly and
the creaking of saddle leather, as a man swings out of the
saddle. Footsteps approach. A man's head and shoulders, back
to camera, comes into scene. He unloops the strand of bailing
wire and lets the gate fall open, then turns and we see his
face. He is Lednov. His cheek and jowls have a dark growth
of beard. He wears a black leather jacket and a wrangler's
grey hat. The clothes Forster was wearing. As he moves back
to his horse, CAMERA PULLS BACK and PANS AROUND.
His companions, McCall and Peters, also wear black leather
jackets, sombre, dusty pants and hats. They are mounted on
matched roans. The horses are winded, lathered and dirty. It
is obvious they have ridden hard. Lednov strides forward and
as he reaches for the reins the horse shies away. Brutally
he jerks on the reins. The horse rears. He snatches his hat
from his head and whacks the horse across the nose. McCall
rides over and grabs the reins. Lednov scrambles into the
saddle.
ANGLED TOWARD gate. Lednov rides forward through the gate.
His horse is limping badly. The others follow. They do not
stop to put the gate back up.
LONG SHOT. Clay's cavalcade moves forward along the trail.
There are cloud patches overhead and faintly in the back
country thunder rumbles. The mules pull the jolting wagons
forward in a slow trot. Clay rides ahead. Steve and the remuda
follow.
FULL SHOT. Lednov, McCall and Peters ride into the yard and
up to the horses' trough. The horses plunge their muzzles
deep into the trough. As the men dismount, Wyatt, a sinewy
little man, hurries from the direction of the barn.
at horse trough. Wyatt, smiling his pleasure, comes up as
the three men dismount.
He extends his hand to Lednov. Lednov ignores it. The three
men are looking around them. Two work horses, fat and elderly,
amble across the corral to nuzzle the roans through the fence.
Wyatt is a little taken aback by Lednov's manner.
Wyatt frowns up at Lednov, angered by the order.
McCall and Peters move closer to Wyatt, who glances around
worriedly. Realizing he better do as he's told, he goes to
the roan and rubs his ears.
Bending, he lifts the horse's hoof. Lednov, McCall and Peters
watch him. He drops the hoof, straightens.
Wyatt hesitates. Lednov steps toward him.
He picks up the roan's reins and starts leading him into the
corral. Lednov, with a jerk of his thumb, indicates that
McCall is to go with him. McCall follows. Lednov and Peters
turn toward the house.
As Lednov and Peters start for the house, Mrs. Wyatt, a woman
of about fifty, small, plump, browned from the sun and hard
from work, comes out on the porch. She has taken off her
apron and holds it in her hand. She smiles at the two men.
ANGLED PAST Mrs. Wyatt. She starts down the steps as Lednov
and Peters come up.
At his tone, the welcoming smile leaves her face. She looks
from one to the other. Lednov pushes past her up the steps
and into the house. Mrs. Wyatt follows him with her glance.
McCall motions.
LONG SHOT. In the f.g. the cavalcade moves along the trail.
Now the Sierras back of the Wyatt ranch are much closer. The
sun has set but it is still light.
MED. SHOT. Peters sprawls on the ground, smoking. He looks
up as Wyatt and McCall cross from the direction of the barn.
Wyatt goes on past and hurries up the steps.
ANGLED PAST Wyatt. This is the main room of the house -- a
living room and kitchen combined: wood-stove against one
wall, a sink with a pump against another, a fireplace, some
simple furniture and, hanging from one of the rough walls, a
concertina. Through an open doorway can be seen the Wyatt's
bedroom. Another door, closed, leads into the second bedroom.
The house has a warm, well-scrubbed look. Wyatt enters.
Mrs. Wyatt, stoking the stove, turns. She glances nervously
in the direction of the bedroom. Wyatt shifts his glance to
the fireplace -- there is no gun hanging from the hooks above
the mantel. Lednov appears in the doorway of the bedroom.
He crosses to the fireplace. He is carrying Wyatt's rifle,
gun belt and six gun.
Wyatt has had as much of this as he can stand. He starts
angrily across the room.
She crosses to him and stands in his way. Wyatt pushes past
her and grabs for the guns. Lednov gives him a swipe with
the back of his hand, knocking him away easily.
Mrs. Wyatt helps Ed to his feet. She puts an arm around him.
Lednov crosses to the cupboard and opens it. Finding the box
of shells, he slips it in his pocket.
Wyatt and his wife look at each other. Then meekly they obey.
MED. SHOT. Here the trail starts down into the valley. From
o.s. comes the SOUND of the cavalcade approaching. Clay rides
into the scene and stops on the hilltop to glance ahead.
Clay's ANGLE. A light can be seen ahead in the valley.
Clay turns and rides back toward the wagon. The mules have
slowed to a walk in the climb up the hill.
on wagon - (MOVING). Clay rides up alongside. Mary is hunched
forward on the seat.
He glances down into the wagon bed where Helen is sitting by
Elaine.
Clay rides back toward the rear.
The wagon reaches the crest of the hill. Mary hits the mules
with the reins. The mules break into a trot. Behind, the
remuda comes into view. Clay sits his horse by the side of
the trail and watches.
MED. SHOT. Mrs. Wyatt stands by the stove, watching the three
men at the table. Wyatt sits in a chair by the stove.
Lednov pushes his chair back and rises.
Wyatt and his wife exchange frightened glances. That's the
last thing they want.
With the fingers of his right hand he automatically rubs his
shoulder just above the heart.
Grudgingly, McCall gives in. They exit. Wyatt stares after
them raging at his impotence.
MED. FULL SHOT. The three men mount their horse, dig their
spurs in and ride away. As they ride toward the gate, Wyatt
comes out on the steps.
LONG SHOT. Here the trail passes through a narrow draw, then
climbs a small rise which overlooks the gate. Clay's caravan
jogs along the trail.
LONG SHOT - DOWN ANGLE. The caravan climbs toward camera.
CAMERA PANS AROUND to SHOOT DOWN TOWARD the Wyatt ranch.
Through the gate ride Lednov, McCall and Peters. They stop
for a moment then turn right and trot along the fence line.
As they disappear, the SOUND of the caravan's approach is
heard o.s.
MED. FULL SHOT. Clay gallops into the yard and swings out of
the saddle. The farmhouse is dark.
ANGLED THROUGH window, PAST Wyatt. Clay opens the gate and
hurries up the steps and across the porch.
MED. SHOT. Clay raps on the door.
The door opens. Wyatt comes out. He pumps Clay's hand.
In the kitchen a match flares as Mrs. Wyatt lights the lamp.
Mrs. Wyatt comes out to stand in the doorway. She shakes
Clay's hand.
He turns and motions off.
ANOTHER ANGLE. Clay, Wyatt and Mrs. Wyatt in f.g. The wagon
is coming toward the yard followed by the remuda.
Clay, Mrs. Wyatt and Wyatt. O.s. the wagon and horses can he
heard.
She turns back into the kitchen. Clay looks after her, then
hurries down the steps. Wyatt follows his wife inside.
Wyatt goes to the stove and starts stoking the fire. Mrs.
Wyatt takes the lamp from the wall bracket and goes into the
bedroom.
FULL SHOT. It is a pleasant room with a large, handmade,
double bed, white flour sack curtains at wide windows. Mrs.
Wyatt puts the lamp on the dresser. Going to the bed she
pulls back the covers, feels the sheets.
Turning from the bed, she crosses to the dresser. Beside the
dresser is a camel-back trunk. She starts to open a dresser
drawer, pauses and looks down at the trunk. Moving to the
trunk, she hesitates. Then making up her mind, she bends
down and throws open the trunk.
DOWN ANGLE. A girl's clothing is neatly packed in the trunk.
A framed picture is face down on top of the clothing. Mrs.
Wyatt kneels by the trunk, pushes the dresses aside and finds
a nightgown. CAMERA ANGLE WIDENS as she rises and shakes it
out. It is frilly, dainty, very feminino; obviously the
nightdress of a young girl. She closes the trunk, turns and
as she goes to the bed, Wyatt comes through the door carrying
the towel-wrapped stove lid. She lays the nightgown on the
bed, takes the stove lid and puts it between the sheets.
Wyatt is staring down at the garment.
They face each other. Wyatt reaches out and takes the
nightgown.
Wyatt opens the trunk, puts the nightgown in and closes the
lid.
The slamming of a door o.s. interrupts them. They turn and
start for the door.
She follows Wyatt to the doorway, CAMERA DOLLYING WITH her.
She stops in the doorway.
ANGLED PAST Mrs. Wyatt. Clay, carrying Elaine, bundled in
blankets, comes forward. Wyatt has stopped just inside the
kitchen. Mary and Helen follow Clay through the door.
She stops, staring at the girl.
The Wyatts in the doorway. They recognize the girl. Wyatt's
expression hardens. Clay, carrying Elaine, pushes between
them into the bedroom.
MED. SHOT. Clay carries the girl to the bed and gently puts
her down. Her eyes are closed. Slowly the Wyatts enter the
room to stand close together staring at the girl on the bed.
Clay suddenly realizes that something is wrong. He glances
up. Elaine opens her eyes and looks up at her mother and
father.
Wyatt doesn't move.
As Clay waits, Wyatt moves through the door unable to argue
back.
FULL SHOT. Mary and Helen stand close to the steve, looking
anxiously toward the bedroom door as Clay and Wyatt come
out. Clay closes the door. Wyatt, dazed by the shock of seeing
his daughter again, stands momentarily staring at the closed
door. Then very slowly he turns and looks at Helen and Mary.
his ANGLE. Mary and Helen, seeing the two men's expressions,
look from one to the other, puzzled.
He crosses to the kitchen door, exits, slamming the door
behind him.
Turning from them, he exits. Mary and Helen look at each
other. Then Helen grins wryly and goes over to the cupboard.
MED. SHOT. Wyatt in the f.g. stands by the horse trough. His
face is set, his expression hard, unyielding. Clay comes
across the yard past the wagon. Wyatt doesn't look at him as
Clay comes up.
Clay and Wyatt. Clay takes the makings from his pocket, rolls
a cigarette, lights it.
O.s. Steve whistles the tune of the A B C song as he comes
out of the barn.
Steve approaches from the barn.
Clay and Wyatt. Clay takes the making from his pocket, rolls
a cigarette, lights it.
O.s. Steve whistles the tune of the A B C song as he comes
out of the barn.
Steve approaches from the barn.
Steve comes up.
He starts whistling again as he continues toward the wagon.
wagon. Steve picks up a couple of valises and some blankets
and heads for the house, still whistling. In the b.g. can be
heard the mutter of voices as Clay and Wyatt talk.
Helen is sitting at the table, eating a piece of bread and
drinking coffee. Mary stands at the window. Steve is heard
coming up the steps and across the porch. He pushes the door
open and enters.
Mary turns from the window.
Steve stands with his arms full, looking at Mary.
She crosses to him and smiles wryly.
Steve hesitates.
Steve exits.
MED. CLOSE. Steve stops on the porch. He is puzzled, worried.
He glances back then over toward the fence where Wyatt and
Clay are talking. He shrugs and starts off toward the wagon.
MED. SHOT. Mary crosses to the stove.
Mary lifts the stove lid and puts a stick in the firebox.
She motions to the bedroom door.
Footsteps across the porch. The two girls look toward the
door.
SHOOTING PAST Mary. The door slowly opens. Wyatt enters. He
crosses to the bedroom door, CAMERA PANNING WITH him. It is
as though he doesn't see the two women. He stands in front
of the door, staring at it. Then his hand moves to the knob.
Slowly he turns the knob and opens the door. The two girls
watch him as he hesitates on the threshold. Then he enters
and closes the door softly. Helen looks over at Mary and
smiles.
MED. SHOT as Wyatt stops, looking at Elaine, resting back
against the pillow, seeming very young in the nightgown. For
a moment it is difficult to know what is in Wyatt's mind.
Then he sees the twin tintypes. CAMERA MOVES TOWARD Wyatt's
face as tears come to his eyes.
MED. SHOT as footsteps cross the porch and the screen door
creaks open. Clay enters the kitchen, carrying the girls'
suitcases and some blankets. He nods to the girls, then goes
to the door leading to the other bedroom. There he stops.
As he carries their belongings in:
The room is lighted only by the moonlight. Mary and Helen
are in the big four poster bed, close to the window. Clay's
footsteps are heard on the porch. The kitchen door closes
softly. There is the rattle of a stove lid being lifted.
Mary slides out of bed and slips into a robe.
Clay turns from the stove to the cupboard over the sink and
takes down a coffee cup. The door into Elaine's bedroom is
closed. The door into Mary's bedroom opens and Mary enters
the kitchen. He turns back to the stove and fills his cup as
Mary comes up.
He picks up his coffee and goes out on the porch. Mary
hesitates, then follows.
ANGLED PAST Clay. Mary comes out. Clay sits on the bench by
the door, drinking his coffee.
Mary crosses to stand above him.
Mary sighs, sits beside him. From the pocket of her robe she
takes tobacco, rolls a cigarette and lights it. She passes
the tobacco to Clay. He rolls one.
Mary strikes a match and holds the flame to his cigarette.
Mary rises to move to the edge of the porch.
Mary in f.g.
Turning, she leans against the post that supports the porch.
Clay puts his cup down, looks up. She is very lovely standing
in the moonlight, her body arched back, the robe open a
little.
Straightening, she crosses the porch to pause momentarily
close to Clay.
She enters the house. Clay looks after her, smiling faintly.
He knows she is up to something but not what.
MED. SHOT. Save for the moonlight coming through the window,
the room is dark. Mary enters softly, throws off her robe
and slips into bed beside Helen.
on bed. Moonlight falls across the bed. Mary pulls the covers
up. Helen turns her head.
Mary snuggles down on the pillow.
MED. LONG SHOT - ANGLED THROUGH window PAST Mary. The early
morning sun fills the yard. Steve is in the corral harnessing
the mules. Clay and Wyatt are taking Mary's and Helen's trunks
out of the wagon.
Mary, who was in profile, turns.
Helen is seated at the table. Mary stands with her back to
the window near the sink.
Mary comes over to stand by the table. Her expression is
thoughtful.
Helen rises. Her manner is determined.
as she stops, apparently inspired by Mary's last remark. She
looks out into the yard where Clay is working on the wagon.
SHOOTING TOWARD Elaine's bedroom door. Helen crosses to Mary.
She puts her arm around Mary's shoulder.
As she speaks she edges Mary to the door leading outside.
Mary smiles at her, shrugs and exits. Helen looks after her.
Mary's footsteps are heard going down the steps. Then Helen
swings around and going to Elaine's door, opens it.
MED. SHOT. Elaine is sitting up in bed. There is a small
table by the bed and on it is a breakfast tray. Mrs. Wyatt
sits by the bed. Elaine looks happy for the first time. Mrs.
Wyatt is holding a cup to her lips. Helen enters and closes
the door.
Crossing to the bed she takes the cup from Mrs. Wyatt.
As she pushes Mrs. Wyatt toward the door.
She closes the door behind Mrs. Wyatt and comes back, sits
on the edge of the bed and holds the cup to Elaine's lips.
Elaine tries not to show her panic at this suggestion.
Elaine pushes the cup away, sits up straighter.
Elaine buries her head in the pillow.
Elaine sits up and grabs Helen's arm.
The door opens and Mrs. Wyatt enters. She hurries over to
the bed, pushes Helen aside, and takes the sobbing girl in
her arms.
Mrs. Wyatt flares at Helen.
Turning, she goes to the door.
She exits.
MED. SHOT. Leaving the door open, Helen enters the kitchen.
She glances back at the bedroom, half smiling, then crosses
to the window and looks out.
ANGLED past Helen THROUGH window. Clay is crossing the yard
toward the house.
MED. SHOT. Helen turns from the window and walks hurriedly
to the second bedroom door. Clay's footsteps cross the porch.
Helen enters the bedroom and closes the door as Clay comes
in. Clay looks around, then seeing the open bedroom door,
crosses to it.
ANGLED PAST Clay in doorway. Mrs. Wyatt is holding the sobbing
girl in her arms. She looks over at Clay.
Then realizing that something is wrong he steps into the
bedroom.
Hearing his voice, Elaine lifts her head from her mother's
shoulder.
Clay looks from one to the other, frowning. Elaine tries to
get out of bed. Her mother holds her.
Turning, he exits. Mrs. Wyatt holds Elaine close.
MED. SHOT. Helen stands on the porch in the sunlight. She
glances back. Clay, his expression hard and angry comes out.
He doesn't look at Helen but stalks down the steps toward
the wagon.
Clay comes toward the wagon. Helen stands on the porch.
Clay appears behind her. Mary turns and smiles.
He catches Clay's glance and his face falls.
Steve gets some courage. He comes over to his brother and
faces him.
He pauses; Clay waits.
Clay moves past them toward the corral. Mary looks after
him, then turning, motions to Helen. Helen starts toward the
wagon.
Clay's horse stands saddled at the fence. He vaults into the
saddle, turns the horse.
He rides off. Steve, delighted, runs to start loading the
girls' things. Helen hurries into the scene.
Mary and Helen. Mary smiles at Helen.
Helen nods, looking at Mary as though in admiration.
LONG SHOT - the wagon, followed by the remuda and with Clay
riding ahead moves slowly up the canyon back of the ranch.
LONG SHOT - ANGLED WEST. The forest is fairly open, yellow
pine, lodgepole and fir. To the West can be seen the bald
red granite domes of the higher range. O.s. there is the
SOUND of the cavalcade approaching. CAMERA PANS AROUND and
ANGLES PAST. Toward camera, comes the cavalcade, climbing
slowly. Far in the distance and down can be seen the waste
of desert and the barren hills of Nevada. Clay, a rifle across
his legs, is riding on one side of the wagon. Steve rides
beside Mary, who is driving. The remuda trails behind. Helen,
lying in the wagon bed, cannot be seen.
ANGLED PAST Steve. Steve has a copy of Leslie's Weekly open
on the pommel. Helen lies full length in the wagon bed,
occupying herself by giving herself a manicure with an orange
stick.
Clay glances over at his brother. Mary sees him watching.
Their eyes meet. She smiles. He doesn't return the smile.
He sighs and scowls down at the page. He puts his finger on
a word and starts to spell it out.
Mary starts to protest -- Steve goes on.
ANGLED PAST Clay.
He touches his horse with his spurs and rides on ahead.
ANGLED PAST Mary. Steve in the b.g. Mary looks after Clay,
puzzled, wondering. Then she looks over at Steve.
Here the forest has thinned out. The trail climbs a rise,
then drops down. Clay jogs along the trail, his rifle across
his knees. As he reaches the edge of the forest at the crest
of the rise, he suddenly pulls his horse to a stop, swings
around and rides back into the trees. Throwing the reins
over the horse's head, he swings out of the saddle and moves
cautiously to the crest of the hill.
Clay's ANGLE. The trail leads down through open country to a
big meadow ringed with lodgepole pine, and across the meadow
to start climbing toward another, higher range of hills.
Three horsemen on roans, Lednov, Peters and McCall, are
crossing the meadow slowly.
DOWN ANGLE. Lednov, Peters and McCall as they ride across
the meadow.
Clay, as he peers down. He cocks his rifle. The voices of
Mary and Steve and the SOUND of the approaching wagon can be
heard o.s. Clay turns his head.
the cavalcade. Mary and Helen are in the seat of the wagon.
Steve rides alongside.
Clay. He lowers his rifle, waves at them to stop and be quiet,
rises and hurries down the hill, CAMERA PANNING WITH him.
MED. SHOT of Lednov as he pulls in his limping horse, steps,
looking back over his shoulder as though he sensed an
unfamiliar presence. The other two watch him, frowning. Then
he shrugs and glances down at the bad leg of his mount.
As they start away, moving slowly toward the trees in the
distance...
Clay motions to Mary to stop as he hurries toward the wagon.
Mary reins in the mules.
LONG SHOT. Clay, in close foreground, stands, leaning on his
rifle. The sun has set and the valley below is in shadow.
There is the silence of dusk. No wind stirs the trees. There
is some light outlining the high mountains -- treeless crags
and domes and spires. Clay turns.
Down the hill in the forest, is the wagon. Beyond it the
horses stand. Steve is stretched out on his stomach studying
his magazine. Helen is sitting on a tarp playing solitaire.
Clay starts down the hill toward the camp.
Clay walks through the trees. As he comes around a big yellow
pine, he stops suddenly and looks down.
ANGLED DOWN PAST Clay. Mary lies on the carpet of pine
needles, her head pillowed on her arms, her dress pulled
taut across her chest. She is looking up through the trees
at the fading sky.
Clay stares down at Mary. She does not look at him. She is
aware of his presence, but she doesn't show it. In the soft
light of dusk she is very lovely. Clay is conscious of her
lovliness. He would like to drop down beside her.
Mary. She turns her face to look at him. CAMERA ANGLE WIDENS.
Clay stands above her, looking down. For a moment their eyes
meet. Clay starts away. CAMERA HOLDS ON Mary.
ANGLED PAST Mary, who rises slowly. Clay looks back,
hesitates, then crosses to where the horses are tethered and
starts saddling his mare. Mary moves down toward him through
the trees.
Clay tightens the cinch. Mary moves up to stand beside him.
He swings into the saddle, pulls the rifle out of the scabbard
and lays it across the pommel.
He touches the mare with his spurs and trots down the hill.
He disappears around a bend in the trail.
Mary, in the f.g., is staring after Clay. Helen is watching
her. Steve has risen and walks up behind her. He smiles at
her.
She starts down toward the wagon, Steve walking beside her
and CAMERA TRUCKING WITH them THROUGH the forest.
Mary glances over.
They have passed Helen, playing solitaire on the canvas, and
have reached the place where the grub box stands. Steve
spreads a tarp for her.
Mary sits down. Steve opens the grub box and takes out some
plates, tinned food and hardtack.
He hands her a plate of food, takes another and goes over to
Helen.
Helen looks up from her card game, takes the plate with a
smile.
He grins at her, turns and comes back to Mary who is watching
him.
Steve sits on the edge of the grub box and picks up his plate.
Mary shakes her head.
Steve looks over at her, embarrassed, a little hurt by her
tone. He rises, takes Mary's empty plate and his own and
goes over to the little spring to wash them. Mary looks
sharply at Helen. Helen shrugs. Mary rises and follows Steve
over to the spring.
Steve kneels by the little pool, washing the plates in the
run off. Mary stops above him.
She kneels beside him. Steve looks over at her.
She looks down at the water bubbling up into the little moss
lined pool.
CLOSE SHOT - DOWN ANGLE. O.s. there is the SOUND of the
cavalcade moving. A wheel passes camera, then another. CAMERA
PULLS BACK to reveal the wagon passing in the moonlit
darkness. Mary is driving.
Clay rides into the shot, his rifle ready. The wagon follows.
Then the remuda with Steve bringing up the rear. Steve also
holds his rifle ready. Both men are wary, watchful,
apprehensive.
FULL SHOT - DOWN ANGLE. SHOOTING DOWN THROUGH the leaves of
a quaking aspen. The cavalcade moves on along the trail.
FULL SHOT. The east is grey with the approaching dawn. The
terrain is treeless, forbidding. Granite crags rise all
around. The trail leads up through a canyon then narrows
along the edge of a cliff. The cavalcade toils forward. Clay,
in the lead, stops and waits for the wagon to come abreast.
As the wagon comes abreast, Clay dismounts, loops the reins
over the tail gate, then swings up into the seat, motioning
for Mary to move over. He takes the reins, puts his rifle
down in front of him.
Clay and Mary. Helen is sleeping in the bed of the wagon.
Mary glances ahead.
She picks up the rifle and holds it across her knees.
Mary glances over at him wonderingly.
They ride along in silence for a moment. The trail is rough.
The jolting wagon throws them together. Their shoulders touch.
Mary studies him, trying to figure out what he means.
Clay is busy with driving down the rough road. He speaks
without looking at her.
Helen. She lies in the bed of the wagon, looking up.
She waits for an answer, but getting none, continues.
Clay and Mary. Clay busies himself with the brake and the
reins.
Clay and Mary in f.g. The trail now goes down a slope to a
river, which boils out of a narrow canyon, then follows the
river through the canyon. Clay hands the reins to Mary, takes
his rifle.
Clay swings down. The wagon moves past him. He frees his
horse, swings into the saddle and gallops down toward the
canyon.
Mary. She looks after him.
The wagon moves down toward the river. Clay disappears into
the canyon. Steve and the remuda follow the wagon.
ANGLED TOWARD mouth of canyon. Clay rides along the trail,
his rifle at the ready. Now he moves warily, keeping a sharp
lookout. The canyon is dark, sinister.
The cavalcade enters the canyon.
Clay rides toward camera. The trail curves around a cliff.
Clay. He rides around the bend in the trail. He hears
something. He reins the horse in. Some pebbles rattle down
the cliff. He looks up.
The muzzle of a rifle is visible. Clay starts to bring his
gun up.
Clay lets his rifle rest across his knees. He looks up.
Fowler, a well-set-up young man in jeans, blue shirt and
worn jacket and wearing a battered hat, moves into scene.
Clay. He is wary, puzzled as to the man's identity. For all
he knows it may be one of Lednov's men.
Clay and Fowler.
SHOOTING PAST Fowler. Into view comes the wagon and the
remuda. Fowler lowers his rifle. He slides down the cliff to
stand beside Clay.
Clay and Fowler.
He extends his hand. Clay shakes it.
He motions ahead, starts walking. Clay rides beside him.
FULL SHOT. The river is beyond the meadow. In the pine forest
at the edge of the meadow is Fowler's camp. The cavalcade is
driving up to the camp. There are two horses tethered in the
meadow.
MED. FULL SHOT. A tarp is stretched over the camp. There is
a crude stone fireplace, a rough table and two benches.
Shelves are nailed between the trees. In a small lean-to
there is a bunk with Fowler's bedroll on it. Fowler stands
watching Mary and Holen as they get out of the wagon. The
horses sproad out across the meadow. Steve and Clay dismount.
Both unsaddle. Helen, Mary and Fowler exchange glances. Then
the two women walk toward the camp, which is behind a screen
of trees.
Helen and Mary enter the camp.
She goes off and across the meadow. Mary looks after her,
shrugs and going to the fireplace, takes moss and twigs from
the pile and puts them in. Clay, carrying saddle bags and
canteens, enters.
He puts them down, goes over to the fireplace and kneels to
light the moss. Mary has stepped back.
As he lights the fire, the lower portion of Mary's body comes
into the shot. Clay becomes aware of her closeness. He rises
slowly. CAMERA ANGLES UP. Mary is standing facing him, almost
touching him. They stare at each other without speaking.
Both suddenly move togother. They kiss. There is a SOUND
over shot and they step apart, looking off.
Steve has come into scene and is looking at them. He smiles
with pleasure and surprise.
Steve nods, smiles at both of them and goes out of scene.
Clay and Mary face each other. Suddenly Clay swings around
and goes out of shot after his brother.
She looks after him, clearly in love, disappointed that they
were interrupted. Then she turns to the fire.
Clay and Steve. CAMERA MOVES AHEAD of them as they walk toward
the wagon. Steve has begun to whistle blithely. Clay looks
sideways at him. Steve whistles even louder. They stop at
the wagon. CAMERA HOLDS. Steve climbs inside and hands down
the grub box.
Clay puts the grub box on the ground. Steve tosses out the
bed rolls, then jumps out. He grins up at Clay.
Clay, embarrassed, puts his hand on the boy's shoulder.
Steve watches him, puzzled. His exuberance has gone.
Abruptly Clay turns and indicates the grub box. Steve watches
him.
Steve nods and carries the grub box out of the scene. Clay
stares after him. Then he picks up the bed roll and moves
around the wagon.
Clay in the f.g. In front of Clay stretches the meadow with
the river beyond. The horses are grazing in the meadow. Fowler
can be seen hurrying toward the aspens and alders that screen
the river.
MED. SHOT. Here the river moves quietly down. The bank is
sandy. Alders and aspens screen it from the meadow. Helen
sits on the sand taking off her shoes and stockings. Her
toilet box is beside her. Something on the bank catches her
attention, she rises and climbs the bank. Some branches of
aspen cover an object. She pulls the branches away, revealing
a crud, miner's cradle or rocker.
Helen stares down at the cradle. She doesn't know what it
is.
Helen, startled, turns.
Fowler and Helen. They stare at each other.
She glances from Fowler to the cradle.
Hurriedly he covers it with branches again. Helen watches
him, curious, interested.
When Fowler doesn't explain she moves on down the bank and
sits on the sand.
Fowler comes over and sits down beside her. He takes [a]
sack of tobacco and papers from his pocket. She reaches for
them. He watches her wide-eyed as she rolls a cigarette. He
holds a match for her.
She turns to the toilet case on the sand beside her, takes
out a comb. He glances at the box, then reaches over and
from it takes her powder box. He sniffs it. Without
irritation, as though borrowing a toy from a child, Helen
takes the powder box from him.
She looks at him then up the bank where the cradle is.
Fowler hesitates. Helen hands him back the powder box as
matter-of-factly as she took it. He accepts it gratefully,
again putting it to his nose. Now he looks up at her,
regarding her calculatingly for a moment or two. Their eyes
meet.
He reaches to his throat and lifts over his head a braided
loop of rawhide. Attached to the loop is a small, plump,
soft-leather poke. Still holding the powder box, he passes
her the poke. She starts to work with the thong.
Helen still struggles with the thong. He takes the poke,
pulls it open, pouring grains of gold into his palm. Helen
looks at the shining heap in his hand. Then she takes the
poke and pours some of the grains in her own palm. She looks
down at it. Her expression is calculating. She looks up at
Fowler and then the hard look goes away. She gives him a
soft smile.
CLOSE SHOT - DOWN ANGLE. Mary is asleep in the shade of a
pine. She lies on a tarp using a folded blanket for a pillow.
It is very quiet. She stirs, opens her eyes. Her expression
changes. A soft smile plays around her lips as CAMERA ANGLE
WIDENS and we see Clay sitting near her, leaning against the
bole of a pine. He isn't looking at her. Mary watches him
for a moment.
Clay looks over at her. Then rising he moves closer, squats
and rolls a cigarette. He holds it out. She licks it, then
puts it in her mouth. Clay lights a match, holds it out. She
catches his hand and holds the flame to her cigarette.
She still holds his hand. They look at each other.
Clay doesn't answer.
She holds his hand, smiling up. Clay hesitates, then desire
for her is more than he can bear, so he takes her in his
arms. They kiss, holding the kiss for a long while.
They break. She lies looking up. He half lies, half sits
beside her.
For answer, Clay kisses her again -- hard, ruthlessly. His
hands crush her shoulders. Mary holds the kiss for a moment,
then draws back, waiting for him to say the words she wants
to hear. His hands pull her toward him. Mary wants the kiss --
but she also wants a declaration of love. She makes one last
try to get it.
Clay's grip on her shoulders tightens. She searches his face
with a glance -- stares into his eyes -- then pushes him
away and sits up.
Mary. She is hurt by his silence.
CAMERA ANGLE WIDENS. Clay's expression hardens. He drops his
hands from her shoulders.
She stands. He rises to face her.
Turning she starts down toward camp.
ANGLED PAST Clay. Below is the camp. Beyond the camp, through
the trees, stands the wagon and Steve is hitching up the
mules. Clay hesitates, then follows.
Mary. Tears form in her eyes. She blinks them away, composing
herself with an effort.
MED. SHOT - Helen and Fowler in f.g. Helen sits at one side
of the table, Fowler on the other. Helen holds the soft
leather poke. In the b.g. Mary approaches. Behind her comes
Clay.
Helen pours the gold out in her palm as Mary comes up. Mary
stands looking down.
Clay enters the scene and goes over to pick up his saddle
bags.
She reaches over and pats Fowler's hand.
Mary looks from Helen to Fowler.
Mary stands looking down at Helen. Lovingly Helen pours the
gold back in the poke.
Clay, saddle bags in hand, straightens. Mary directs the
rest of the speech at him.
Helen juggles the poke in her hand.
Steve has entered the camp and is standing looking at them
open-mouthed. Mary moves over to Fowler and holds out her
hand.
Clay moves up beside Mary.
Clay, Mary and Fowler.
He moves on past her, motions to Steve.
Steve hesitates.
He stalks away, followed by Steve. Mary turns and looks after
him.
Mary. She wants to break windows.
Mary, Fowler and Helen. Helen is staring at Mary. She crosses
to her and puts her arm around her shoulders.
Mary throws her arm off and moves after Clay and Steve. Helen
looks at Fowler and shrugs.
the wagon. As Mary hurries up to stand by the tail gate,
Clay and Steve, now mounted, spur their horses and start
across the meadow.
Mary. She stares after them, raging. Then she glances at the
wagon.
Mary in f.g. The mulos stand in their traces, waiting. Mary
makes up her mind what to do. Climbing into the bed, she
heaves out pack saddles, bed rolls, ropes, etc. Clay and
Stove can be seen in b.g. riding down toward where the horses
graze.
ANGLED TOWARD camp. Into the scene come pack saddles, bed
rolls. Helen and Fowler, in b.g., walk toward the wagon.
wagon. Mary straightens, looks off, then climbs into the
seat and picks up the reins and the whip. She lashes the
mules with the whip. CAMERA ANGLE WIDENS. The mules jump and
gallop off. Fowler and Helen come into the scene.
the wagon, pulled by the galloping mules, is disappearing in
a cloud of dust.
the meadow. Clay and Steve have almost reached the horses.
Steve turns.
Clay swings around.
their ANGLE. Mary drives the wagon around a bend in the trail.
ON Clay. He glances after Mary, then reins his horse around
and gallops after her, CAMERA PANNING WITH him.
MOVING SHOT. Mary drives the wagon along the trail. Ahead
beyond the river, the mountains rise. The river is running
bank full. The trail leads down to a rocky, dangerous bank.
Mary pulls the mules in at the bank.
Mary. She looks toward the river. She is frightened, about
to abandon the whole foolish enterprise. She glances back.
FROM Mary's ANGLE. Clay gallops around a bend in the trail.
Mary. She looks in Clay's direction, then turns and stares
at the river.
ANGLED PAST Mary. She makes up her mind to go through with
it and lashes the mules with the whip. CAMERA ANGLE WIDENS.
The mules balk when they reach the river. Mary lashes them
again. They jump forward into the torrent.
Clay gallops toward the river. Steve comes around the bend
in the trail.
the river. The mules flounder, start swimming. The current
catches the wagon. It starts drifting downstream. Mary whips
the mules. They swim, the current pulls them. Then the wagon
goes over. Mary is thrown into the water. The mules kick
themselves free and swim to the other bank. Mary goes under,
comes up and starts swimming desperately. Clay rides into
the SHOT. His mare hesitates at the bank. Clay spurs her and
she plunges in. Mary's belongings can be seen floating down
the river.
Clay swims his horse toward Mary who is floundering in the
stream.
Mary. The current sweeps her against a rock. Stunned -- she
goes under.
Clay swims his horse to her, reaches down and lifts her up
in front of him.
Clay's horse, with the double burden, fights her way out of
the stream and scrambles up the bank to stop on level ground.
Clay and Mary. Clay, his expression anxious, stares down at
the stunned Mary. He swings out of the saddle, holding her
tenderly to him. The brush with death has made him realize
how much she means to him. Gently, he puts her down on the
sand, stoops beside her.
Clay and Mary in f.g. Steve swims his horse across and rides
up the bank to dismount near them.
Mary opens her eyes and sits up
Mary is humiliated, bedraggled and wet, still angry and
fighting back tears.
Mary gets to her feet. CAMERA ANGLE WIDENS. Steve stands in
the b.g. She looks out at the river.
to include wagon in river. Clay, suddenly furious, points to
the wagon.
This is the last straw. Mary turns her back, digs into her
stocking and pulls out some bills. She hands them to him.
Clay looks at Mary, then down at the money.
He turns and sees Steve standing scowling at him. He takes
the rest of his anger out on Steve.
Clay strides over to his horse and swings into the saddle.
Steve stands looking at Mary.
As he plunges his horse into the stream:
FULL SHOT - the lower ford. Where the main road crosses the
river, it flows gently, with sand banks on either side. Three
horsemen appear around a bend in the trail and ride down to
the riverbank. They are Lednov, McCall and Peters. Lednov's
horse is limping badly. They ride into the river.
The horses swim to shore and flounder up the bank, Lednov's
horse last. As the horse starts up the bank Lednov sees
something o.s. and reins the horse in.
FROM Lednov's ANGLE. A piece of clothing floats down the
river. Lednov rides down the bank into the water. He reaches
down awkwardly and gets the piece of clothing, then turns
and rides back up the bank.
The two others have turned and are watching him. He rides up
to them, holding out one of Mary's undergarments.
He turns to scan the river.
Mary's trunk comes floating by. The three men look at each
other, then Lednov turns his horse and starts up the bank of
the river. The others follow.
EXTREME LONG SHOT. The long pine-covered approaches, and the
glistening summit; the early snow covering the rocks with a
thin layer of white. CAMERA PANS DOWN FROM the heights of
the mountains, TO the narrow trail that winds among the trees.
Clay passes, and behind him the pack-horses and the romuda.
Following the remuda comes Mary. She is dressed in a pair of
Steve's pants and wears one of his shirts under her own coat.
Mary, as she swings with the movement of the horse. She is
tired. She wears no makeup. But she looks as unaffectedly
beautiful as we have ever seen her.
the trail. It turns steeply, doubling back, and new Clay is
directly above her. He looks down at her, but she disregards
his glance. We feel that he might speak, but her cold
restraint prevents him. The wind whistles through the trees.
The slow plodding noise of the horses becomes more distant.
MED. FULL SHOT. Lednov, McCall and Peters ride slowly through
the brush to where the trail enters the river. Downstream,
wedged in the rocks is the wagon. The three men look at the
wagon, then turn to look back along the trail.
their ANGLE. Fowler's campfire flickers through the trees.
the three men. They look at each other. Lednov motions in
the direction of Fowler's camp. They start back along the
trail.
FULL SHOT. The three men ride along the trail toward the
camp. Through the trees the campfire flickers.
MED. SHOT. Fowler is putting the supper dishes up on the
shelves beside the fireplace. The camp is cleaner than it
was earlier in the day. It is evident that he has gone to
great pains to make his visitor comfortable.
A mirror has been tacked up on a tree, and under it is a
wash basin. Fowler's rifle and shotgun are in a rack near
the fireplace. Helen's trunk stands open near the lean-to.
Helen, wearing a robe, takes some clothing from it, closes
the trunk.
Fowler turns and smiles. Helen pushes through the curtains
into the lean-to. Fowler puts the last of the dishes on the
shelf, crosses to the trunk and moves it over to the side of
the lean-to. Turning to go back to the fireplace, he stops.
Fowler in the f.g. Lednov, rifle in hand, stands just inside
the camp on the meadow side.
Lednov moves slowly forward to stand near the table. He looks
around him. Fowler starts slowly toward the fireplace.
Trying to be casual, Fowler moves closer to where the guns
are racked.
He has edged closer to the gun rack. Lednov seems unaware
that he is near the guns. His interest is centered on the
lean-to. He moves to the entrance, stands with his hand on
the canvas.
Lednov pulls back the flap. His back is to Fowler, who starts
quickly for the tree, only to stop as McCall comes out from
behind it.
Fowler drops his hands to his side. Lednov turns, grins at
Fowler, and enters the lean-to.
The shelter is dark. Lednov strikes a match and looks around.
The place is empty. There is a bunk, made up. On the left
hand wall a curtain of gunny sacks covers the clothes hanging
there. The match burns down to Lednov's fingers. There is a
SOUND of a scuffle outside a blow, and a groan. Lednov drops
the match and hurries out.
Lednov comes out of the lean-to. Fowler is sprawled by the
table. McCall stands over him, rifle raised.
MED. CLOSE SHOT. Helen stands flattened against a tree.
Cautiously Helen starts moving away.
MED. SHOT. Fowler pulls himself to his feet. Mac stands near
him.
Fowler sinks on a bench, his head in his hands. Lednov moves
closer.
MED. SHOT. Helen cautiously moves away from the camp.
A twig snaps underfoot. Helen freezes.
MED. SHOT. Lednov is staring off in the direction of Helen.
McCall moves to the edge of the lean-to, looking off.
MED. CLOSE SHOT. Helen starts forward again, more cautiously
than ever. She reaches a tree, turns to look back.
Helen, back to camera, is in immediate f.g. Through the trees
can be seen the camp and the flickering fire. She turns, and
then fright comes into her expression.
Peters stands in front of her. As he reaches out for her,
she tries to get away. He grabs her, wrapping his arms around
her.
MED. SHOT. From o.s. comes the SOUND of Helen and Peters
struggling. Fowler, hearing the SOUND, gets to his feet.
Lednov and McCall turn on him.
MED. SHOT. Peters, carrying the struggling Helen, heads for
the camp.
ANOTHER ANGLE. Fowler makes a futile dive for Lednov. McCall
swings his rifle. Fowler goes down. In the b.g. Peters drags
the struggling Helen around the lean-to into the camp.
He moves forward to meet Helen and Peters. Lednov reaches
out for Helen. Peters pulls her away.
McCall has taken his attention from Fowler and gives it to
Helen. Unnoticed now, Fowler is struggling back to
consciousness. He tries to pull himself up. McCall turns
back and kicks him again.
She rakes Peters' face with her fingernails, tries to fight
free. Lednov reaches out and grabs her arm. Peters knocks
his arm down. Free for the moment, Helen launches an attack
on McCall, who is getting ready to boot Fowler again. She is
on him like a cat, swarming all over him. He defends himself.
Helen is yelling furiously as she fights McCall.
Lednov has reached her now. He wraps his arms around her and
pulls her away from McCall. Helen tries to fight him.
Lednov pinions her arms.
Helen doesn't answer. Lednov starts twisting her arms.
As the pain increases she blurts out Clay's name.
In a fury, Lednov crushes her arm.
He hurls her from him. She goes back against the table. Fowler
is trying to struggle to his feet. In blind rage, Lednov
raises his gun and fires. Fowler crumples. Helen looks down,
too horrified and terrified to scream. Lednov looks at her,
then almost casually he shoots her. McCall and Peters stand
watching as though frozen.
MED. FULL SHOT - ANGLES east. Behind the ridge rises the
range through which the pass to Nevada cuts its way. The
trail which has dipped down into a canyon comes up to follow
the ridge a ways and then drops down again. Lednov, McCall
and Peters ride along the trail. Lednov, in the lead, stops
suddenly and looks off.
DOWN ANGLE from Lednov's point of view. Far below is a meadow
and crossing it is a wagon road. This is the road from
Yosemite to Sonora. The road comes down the hill to the south
and, as the forest is open at this point, anything approaching
along the road can be seen for some distance. It crosses the
meadow and continues into the northwest. In the meadow is a
snake-rail corral. Clay's pack train comes out of the woods
above the meadow and starts down.
McCall, Lednov and Peters. Lednov motions to his men and
they hurriedly ride forward into the shelter of some trees.
the pack train. Mary, half asleep, slumps forward. Her horse
has stopped. Steve rides up alongside and looks over at her,
anxiously.
Mary starts into wakefulness. She smiles at Steve.
He rides on ahead. Steve looks after him, annoyed, then
follows with Mary.
Clay leads the pack train out into the clearing and toward
the road. A small creek threads its way through the meadow.
Clay rides up to the creek and swings out of the saddle. He
is taking the saddle off as the others ride up.
He throws the saddle down, takes his rifle out of the
scabbard. Steve doesn't move.
He starts off past Mary, glances up.
Mary leans wearily forward on the pommel, too tired to
dismount.
Mary looks down at him. She is hoping he will reach up and
lift her down.
He turns a way abruptly and goes toward the road. Mary looks
after him, disappointed. Steve comes over and helps her down.
Steve and Mary. Steve spreads a tarp on the grass.
Steve goes back and starts unpacking the horses. Mary looks
off in Clay's direction, then stretches out and pillows her
head on her arm. Now the sun is coming up and driving the
darkness out of the meadow. In the distance Clay can be seen
climbing up on a rise.
Clay. He climbs up on an eminence and looks back toward the
hills.
his ANGLE. The open ridge. There is no sign of Lednov.
INTO the meadow. Steve has unpacked the horses. They graze
inside the crude corral. Steve is collecting wood for a fire.
Clay hurries down toward him.
Steve squats beside the pile of needles, twigs and pine cones.
He strikes a match and sets the needles aflame. Clay hurries
into the scene and roughly kicks the fire out. Steve rises.
Steve is ashamed of his thoughtlessness and for a moment is
apologetic.
Clay turns and goes over to where the packs lie. He kneels
beside the pack, rummages in them for hardtack and tinned
food. Steve looks after him.
Steve. He is hurt and angry. Knowing he was in the wrong
about the fire doesn't help matters. He'd like to go off in
the woods and cry, but that's out of the question. Instead
he follows Clay and stands above him.
Clay speaks without looking up.
Clay spreads the food on a tarp, sits down and starts eating
a hardtack.
Steve stares down at him angrier, more hurt than ever.
[As this scene continues, there is heard, faintly o.s. the
SOUND of little bells, the kind that teamsters put on the
hames of their horses. Over the hill, in the direction of
Yosemite, a stage is approaching. It is coming slowly uphill.
Soon it will be visible on the rise about a mile south of
the meadow.]
SHOOTING TOWARD Steve and Clay PAST Mary. She is asleep.
Clay rises and stands facing Steve.
Steve's voice rises during this speech. In f.g. Mary stirs
and opens her eyes. Then she sits up.
Mary has risen. She is listening to Steve. She is also
listening to the bells.
her ANGLE. Over the rise comes the stage. It is still a long
way off.
to include all three. The brothers still don't see Mary.
Clay is ashamed but won't show it. He puts his hand on Steve's
shoulder and pushes him.
Steve swings for his chin. Clay ducks the blow, grabs Steve's
wrist. Steve swings with his left, hitting Clay ineffectually.
Clay pins Steve's arms to his side.
She walks toward them as Clay releases Steve and steps back.
Steve puts his hands up, making ready for another round.
Steve turns abruptly and moves away. He is on the verge of
tears.
She motions off. Clay is suddenly aware of the approaching
stage. He looks in that direction.
FROM his ANGLE. The stage drives along the road.
She turns and starts going through the kyacks, looking for
her things. Clay frowns down at her.
Mary's attention is on the kyacks. From where Clay stands
near her he can see the trail leading down through open
country toward the meadow.
Something o.s. catches his attention, then he pauses to look
off.
LONG SHOT - his ANGLE. Up on the ridge there is the flash of
sun on metal.
MED. SHOT. Lednov, McCall and Peters ride through the trees.
Clay. He looks up anxiously, then turns. CAMERA ANGLE WIDENS
to include Mary and she straightens and faces him, her back
to the trail.
He bends down and picks up her things.
The stage has speeded up and is coming fast down the road.
Mary looks up at Clay hurt and shocked by his sudden
sharpness. She had hoped he wouldn't let her go.
He starts off, Mary following.
Mary makes one last attempt to get him to change his mind.
He waves for the stage to stop.
The driver sees Clay waving and pulls the horses in. The
stage moves down to the edge of the meadow.
The stage. It is a small one, a double-seated buckboard with
one woman passenger and the driver an elderly man. On the
side of the vehicle is painted: "Yosemite-Sonora Stage Line".
The woman, middle-aged and rather drab, looks at Mary
curiously.
He jumps out of the stage and follows Clay, carrying Mary's
belongings, around back of the stage. Mary gets into the
stage beside the woman who moves over for her.
on back of stage. The driver opens the boot and Clay hands
him Mary's belongings. He starts stowing them in the boot.
Clay starts scribbling a note. In the b.g. Steve has moved
up beside the stage. He stands looking up at Mary.
featuring Mary and Steve.
Mary reaches down and takes his hand.
Steve's expression hardens. He glances toward the back of
the stage, then at Mary.
Clay and the driver come around the stage. Steve steps back.
The driver climbs into the seat. Clay and Mary look at each
other.
Before Clay can speak, the driver snaps his whip and the
stage jerks away down the road. Mary doesn't look back. Clay,
in f.g., looks after it. Dust rises. It disappears around a
bend in the road. Clay turns and starts across the meadow.
Steve looks after Clay, hesitates, then follows.
as Clay reaches the spot where the kyacks and saddles are
thrown. Steve comes up to him.
Clay is looking off, hardly listening.
Clay's eyes are narrow, peering toward:
LONG SHOT (Clay's ANGLE) of the shadowed slope. Something
moves, indistinct, and then the sun catches a gun barrel as
it disappears.
Clay and Steve as Clay turns sharply.
Steve looks over toward the horses, stalling.
Turning, he crosses to where Steve's horse stands. CAMERA
ANGLE WIDENS. He loads the horse back, throws a blanket and
saddle on and cinches up the saddle. Steve watches, angry
and hurt. Clay steps back.
the two brothers. They stare at each other. Steve is on the
verge of tears. Hurriedly, he swings into the saddle.
He glances down to Clay and digs his spurs in and gallops
after the stage. Clay's stern expression leaves his face. He
looks after the boy, smiles softly and then starts carrying
the pack-saddle into the shelter of the forest.
MED. SHOT. Steve rides along the road. He pulls his horse
in, then glances back.
LONG SHOT - Steve's ANGLE. Clay is carrying the belongings
into the shelter of the forest. CAMERA PANS OVER and UP.
Momentarily a horseman is seen riding into an open space.
Steve as he stares. Then understanding his brother's actions,
he jerks the reins and swings the horse around and rides
back toward the meadow.
MED. SHOT - Steve gallops across the meadow to the corral,
swings off and starts unsaddling. Clay is inside the forest
lighting the fire.
Clay. He looks over toward Steve, then rises and hurries
toward him.
Clay and Steve. Steve takes down the bars and puts the horse
in the corral. Clay comes up to him as he's putting the bars
back up.
The two brothers stare at each other.
LONG SHOT - DOWN ANGLE. Above the pines smoke rises. The
horses graze inside the corral. In the shadowy forest by the
creek, Clay's camp can be seen. A tarp has been stretched
over the camp. Lednov moves into the right hand side of the
frame and looks down.
Lednov stands on a rocky hill looking down in the meadow.
Behind him are McCall and Peters. They are screened from the
meadow by the rocks. Lednov turns and starts off through the
rocks to circle above the camp. The two men follow. All are
on foot.
LONG SHOT SHOOTING PAST Clay and along his rifle. Clay, hidden
behind a wall of rock, is watching the trail where it comes
down into the meadow. Something moves on the rocky hill above
and to his left. He looks up, waiting. The movement stops.
Clay glances around.
Below Clay, Steve lies in a cut in the rocks, watching the
camp. Clay motions toward the hill. Steve nods.
PAN SHOT - FROM Clay's ANGLE. CAMERA, SHOOTING THROUGH the
rifle sights, SEARCHES the forest and meadow. As a flight of
birds suddenly rises above a section of the forest, the CAMERA
MED. SHOT. Lednov, McCall and Peters have stopped, halted by
the sudden flight of the birds.
Below is the camp. Lednov motions.
Lednov looks at McCall. From his pocket, McCall takes a coin.
McCall flips the coin, shows it to Peters. Peters shrugs and
starts moving cautiously down toward the camp.
Lednov and McCall.
McCall moves off to circle around in back of where Clay and
Steve wait. Lednov watches him go then, moving to the shelter
of the rocks, waits.
His position commands the meadow, where the horses are
corralled, and the camp.
LONG SHOT - Clay's ANGLE. The forest is silent. Then,
momentarily, Peters is in the open. Clay brings his rifle
up, trying to get him in the sights. Wheeler disappears.
MED. SHOT. Stealthily, Peters makes his way down toward the
camp.
ANGLED PAST Peters. Peters, sheltered by a tree trunk, raises
his rifle, then his eye catches a movement. He fires.
LONG SHOT - PAST Clay. Clay has Peters in his sights. He
fires.
Peters. Peters is stretched on the needle-covered earth,
dead.
MED. CLOSE - Clay. Clay throws the empty cartridge out and
another in. O.s. there is a SHOT. A bullet hits near him.
Clay looks off in the direction where Lednov is waiting on
the hill west of the camp. Another SHOT is heard. A bullet
smacks into the rock close to Clay. It comes from McCall's
position southwest of the camp. Clay ducks.
LONG SHOT - Lednov's ANGLE. Lednov is trying to get Clay in
his sights. He fires as Clay is seen momentarily.
LONG SHOT - McCall's ANGLE. McCall fires at Clay.
Clay and Steve crawl down and away from Lednov and McCall's
positions. Steve grins at Clay. He is enjoying this.
Moving cautiously he starts in McCall's direction.
MED. LONG SHOT. McCall, rifle ready looks down toward the
base of the log where Steve now waits. A twig snaps below.
He sights the rifle, waiting.
MED. CLOSE. Clay stands still. The forest is silent again.
MED. LONG SHOT. Lednov, sheltered by a tree, has his rifle
trained on Clay's position.
MOVING SHOT. Clay, walking cautiously, climbs toward McCall's
position. Ahead is an open area. Stooping, Clay picks up a
rock and draws back his arm to throw it.
MED. LONG SHOT - ANGLED TOWARD open area below. The stone
thrown by Clay, crashes in the brush across the open area.
McCall fires.
UP ANGLE PAST Clay. The flash of sunlight on McCall's rifle
attracts Clay's attention. He fires. From behind him, Steve
fires. Clay runs across the open area. Steve fires again.
MED. SHOT. McCall tries to struggle to his feet. Failing, he
brings his rifle up. Clay in b.g. runs to the shelter of a
tree. McCall fires. Clay's rifle barrel emerges from behind
tree. McCall tries to drag himself to safety. Clay fires.
McCall goes down on his face. From Lednov's position comes
the SOUND of a shot.
Clay's ANGLE. CAMERA SEARCHES Lednov's position for some
movement. There is none.
DOWN ANGLE PAST Lednov. Below in the corral the horses are
hunched together. Lednov looks down, then raising his rifle,
he brings one of the horses into the beads of the sights. It
is the bell mare.
His voice echoes again and again. Clay's answer is a shot.
It cuts the branches above Lednov's head.
Lednov. He ducks lower, steadies his rifle.
ANGLED THROUGH sights. The sights center on the bell mare.
Steve. He is standing recklessly trying to find Lednov in
the rocks above.
Clay. He stares down at the horses. A shot is heard.
MED. SHOT. The bell mare rears as the bullet strikes the
bell. The horses mill around the corral.
Clay. He starts forward, face set with rage.
Recklessly Clay raises his rifle and fires three shots at
Lednov's position.
MED. FULL SHOT as Clay fires, Steve starts running down. He
crosses the creek.
LONG SHOT - DOWN. Lednov sees Steve running. He swings his
rifle away from the horses and tries to get the boy in his
sights. Clay fires again. A bullet smacks into the tree.
Lednov flinches. Then again he tries to center on Steve.
MED. SHOT. Steve runs, bending low, toward the rail fence. A
bullet kicks up dirt near him.
LONG SHOT - DOWN. Steve has almost reached the fence. Lednov
fires. Steve stumbles and goes down.
Steve. He lies still a moment, then painfully he crawls to
the rails and with a great effort tries to tear the rails
down. Lednov fires. The bullet whistles past. Steve pulls
the fence down, crawls away from the opening. The horses,
milling around the corral break through. Steve lies still,
face down.
The meadow, ANGLED PAST Clay. The horses scatter across the
meadow.
Clay, now the hunter, moves toward Lednov's position. Lednov
fires. Clay runs and jumps into the creek. Sheltered by the
bank he makes his way up the creek.
Lednov. He waits, his rifle ready. O.s. a twig snaps.
Cautiously he looks ahead. There is silence.
his ANGLE. A light wind runs through the great trees. Shafts
of light filter through the trees, making patterns on the
forest floor. The light is dim, deceptive. Lednov, rifle
ready, searches for some sign of Clay. Then from another
direction comes the SOUND of movement. Lednov swings his
rifle in that direction, waits. The SOUND has stopped.
His voice echoes across the hills. Lednov sights along his
rifle at the direction from which the SOUND of Clay's voice
came. Momentarily Clay is seen as he runs from one tree to
another. Lednov fires.
Clay. Clay cautiously edges around the base of a tree. He
picks up a stick, stops.
His voice can be heard echoing across the hills. He tosses
the stick. Lednov fires at the SOUND of the falling stick.
As his voice echoes across the hills Clay quickly moves into
the open and fires.
Lednov crumples forward as his echoing voice fades out. Clay
moves over to him to stand looking down.
MED. SHOT. Steve sits propped up against the fence rail. His
shirt is off and his shoulder is crudely bandaged. Clay, who
has been putting the bandage on, stands and takes a sack of
tobacco from his pocket.
Clay looks at him for a moment, not angry, but not admitting
he's wrong yet.
FULL SHOT - featuring hotel and doctor's office. The sheriff's
posse, the bodies of Lednov, McCall and Wheeler slung across
the backs of horses, and Clay's remuda, trot down the street.
People come out of the hotel to watch the cavalcade pass.
Clay and Steve are not with the posse. Clay's horse is
tethered in front of the doctor's office which is next door
to the hotel.
MED. SHOT - ANGLED THROUGH window. Clay, back to camera, is
holding a kerosine lamp. The doctor, a lanky, middle-aged
man, is working over Steve, who is stretched out on a table.
MED. SHOT. Shelves filled with bottles line the room, for
the doctor is also the druggist. There is a glass cabinet in
which are the doctor's instruments. The room is cluttered.
The lamp, held by Clay, throws a circle of pale light down
on Steve. The doctor is working on Steve's shoulder and arm.
featuring Clay. Clay suddenly averts his glance and winces
as the doctor probes the wound in Steve's arm. Steve groans.
The lamp wavers.
Footsteps are HEARD approaching. Clay tries to steady his
shaking hand. He is focusing his attention on a far wall. A
woman's hand comes in the scene and takes the lamp from him.
He reacts. CAMERA PULLS BACK to reveal Mary, who has moved
in beside him.
Steve. He smiles up at Mary.
ANGLES PAST doctor.
He suddenly realizes that a strange woman is in the room and
reacts.
Mary lowers the lamp.
Clay and Mary. UP ANGLE PAST lamp.
He straightens into the shot. CAMERA PULLS BACK TO MED. SHOT.
Steve is now bandaged.
As Clay lifts Steve to the cot the doctor exits. Mary watches
Clay cover Steve. Then she goes to the door leading to the
street, stops with her hand on the knob.
Clay straightens and turns.
She opens the door and starts out.
MED. SHOT. Mary starts to close the door behind her. Clay
forces it open. Clay comes out. Mary starts toward the steps.
Mary stops at the edge of the porch. Clay comes up beside
her.
Mary waits, looking up at him.
They look at each other.
For answer, Clay takes her in his arms.
ANGLED PAST Steve on cot. In the b.g. through the open
doorway, Clay and Mary kiss. Steve watches a moment, then
turns his head toward camera. He smiles and closes his eyes.
TWO SHOT - Mary and Clay. They break from the kiss. Clay
looks down at Mary.

The sky is pure blue, exquisitely blemished by huge cumulus
clouds, floating lazily. A single bird sails past. From the
sky the CAMERA MOVES TO earth. Here, too, all is tranquil.
The trees, bright green in the sunlight, move only to the
slight but constant breeze. Now the CAMERA MOVES DOWN,
revealing a wagon to which is hitched a team of horses beside
the road. The wagon is at an awkward angle, but upright. It
is wedged between two rocks where the horses have pulled it
as they tried to reach some forage. Its seat is empty. In
the bed of the wagon several sacks lie, bearing the legend:
The sacks are empty and slashed as by a knife. The ropes
that bound them are cleanly severed. The disorder in the
wagon indicates haste. Two horses are hitched to it, munching
grass or the high leaves of a tree overhead. All that is odd
or unnatural is that the reins have fallen askew and trail
the ground.
Now the CAMERA MOVES AWAY and ALONG tracks made by the wagon
when it left the road. ON THE ROAD two horses stand. These
are saddled, but riderless. The rifle holsters are empty.
CAMERA MOVES TO the ground. There on the road lies the rifle.
The dust is slightly blowing across it, moved by the
persistent summery little breeze. From the rifle, the CAMERA
MOVES ON A LITTLE and STOPS ABRUPTLY ON the sprawled dead
figure of a soldier, then another, face down in the road.
CLOSE SHOT of the dead soldiers, as the CAMERA HOLDS ON them.
Near the hand of one a revolver lies, the fine dust coating
it. Dust blowing over the uniforms, as though seeking to
hide the shame of a murder. As it blows over their still
figures, the SOUND of BIRDS coming over:
This is a western mining town of the Eighties that has
mushroomed up around a gold strike. On the streets prospectors
and miners mingle with merchants. As the CAMERA PICKS UP the
scene, a lumber wagon passes, bearing logs, a ten team wagon,
its trailer filled with ore from the stamp mills and bearing
the legend: ARGUS MINE. A stage coach comes in as we:
On the hotel clerk, as he sits behind the desk, playing a
guitar and singing pensively the ballad of the story. As he
sings, JOHN HAVEN, newly arrived on the stagecoach, walks
in, gazes at the clerk with a slight smile, finding the clerk
completely indifferent to the arrival of anybody, at last
leaves the bag and saunters out.
As Haven leaves the hotel and has reached the saloon, a well-
lighted, plush-looking spot, illumined by kerosene flares.
Sticking a pipe in his mouth, Haven saunters in.
It is a huge elaborate room, lit by overhead chandeliers. A
long mahogany bar runs the length of it. To one side there
is a big stove and the gambling tables. Beyond can be seen
pool tables in an alcove. To another side, a man grinds away
at a piano. A stairway near the end of the bar leads to an
upper floor. The place is crowded and noisy with people.
Haven saunters towards the dice table, pauses, watches; he
is looking the crowd over carefully -- missing no detail of
the place or the people in it. When his turn comes, he picks
up the dice, bets all over the place -- on the line, on the
odds, on the seven, then on the come, the hard way, etc. His
point is eight.
Haven bets again, doubling all over the table.
Players glance at the newcomer. Prince appears from nowhere,
standing behind the stickman, watching. Prince is slender,
black-haired, handsome and impassive. Haven throws again.
Stellman, an Army officer, watches curiously. There is a
little rising murmur as Haven tosses another natural. He
does it without enthusiasm or any lost movement. The bettors
get down on him. Prince touches the stickman's arm; the man
stands aside and Prince takes his place with the stick. Prince
tosses the dice back to Haven. Haven's eyes are fixed on
him. With a little smile, Haven throws the dice to the next
man, picks up his winnings.
His eyes meet Prince's again and then he turns away, Prince's
gaze following him curiously, Stellman looks at Prince.
CAMERA FOLLOWS Haven, as still smiling slightly, he heads
towards the bar, searching the faces of the crowd as he goes.
Two miners are squared off for a fight and Haven, going his
way, walks between them, very indifferent, not even glancing
back at the SOUND of scuffle behind him.
AT THE BAR - Haven alone is not watching the fight. All the
others have turned to see it; even the barman is busy
watching. But Haven's eyes are resting on the figure of a
woman now at the piano, singing. Softly, as if to herself
and for her own enjoyment. He is near the end of the bar and
near the piano, and since no one else listens to her at this
moment, she sings, half smiling, directly for him, and then,
self-consciously, she stops and turns to sit at a table, as
Haven watches her. Behind them the fight is being stopped
and Charlie's eyes follow the huge bouncer, Mick Marion, as
he drags the offenders out to the door and the street. All
is as usual. The bartender is back at work. As Haven turns,
he finds that the place beside him is now occupied by the
young Lieutenant (Phil Stellman). Haven glances at the
uniform, then at the pleasant face of the officer, as the
barman comes up.
A girl sidles up to him, blonde, brash and pretty.
He turns his back to her; she gives him a look and saunters
off. The barman produces the drinks -- a beer for Stellman,
the young officer. The barman folds his arms. Stellman looks
at Haven.
Haven smiles at him.
The barman turns to get it. Stellman is still looking at
Haven.
The barman gives Haven another Rye.
The barman, listening, senses trouble and signals with his
eyes to a big bouncer down the bar. The bouncer moves up
quietly.
They stare at each other for a long second, then Stellman
speaks icily:
Stellman's jaw tightens; then he turns and exits abruptly.
The barman sighs with relief; the bouncer turns away.
He turns away from the bar, after flipping a coin on to it,
while the barman stands there not knowing whether to be angry
or philosophical.
CAMERA FOLLOWS Haven, as he threads his way through the tables
towards the door. His eyes catch sight of the girl who sang
at the piano, Charlie. She is sitting at a table with Prince.
Prince murmurs to her and she glances at Haven, then looks
away again. Haven notes it. As he comes near the table, the
blonde who spoke to him at the bar, accosts him again.
Haven is looking at Charlie. She is checking a stack of coins
the blonde has turned in to her. She glances up with a
fleeting smile at Haven.
Their gazes meet and Prince notes it with narrowing eyes.
The gaze holds like a spell, and then Charlie's smile comes
back, from nowhere.
Haven looks at her, fascinated. She can feel a fascination
herself. Now Haven smiles a little.
She looks at him in a second's silence. Haven turns and
leaves. She watches him go. Prince studies her face, his own
grim. A croupier comes up and places a paper before her. She
hardly notices it.
Charlie snaps out of it long enough to initial the paper.
He turns away. Prince sits still, his eyes on Charlie, his
slim fingers at an habitual trick, that of idly stacking
dice in a little pillar and then picking the pillar aloft by
holding the lowest dice pinched between the thumb and
forefinger, NOT by the edges, but by the sides. Now he does
it as he watches Charlie's face. Her eyes glance again at
the disappearing back of Haven. The sense of fascination
seems to have gotten her, too. Then she realizes the presence
of Prince and his shrewd gaze. She looks at him coolly.
Prince flips the dice into his palm and rises...
The board sidewalk has given way to a rutty dirt road. Now
the racket of the saloon street is just a ghost of noise,
the road dark and silent. Haven has emerged from the saloon.
He glances up the street. Fifty yards ahead, Stellman is
walking slowly. Stellman pauses, shoots a quick glance
backwards, then goes on. Haven follows, going leisurely up
the street after Stellman.
ANGLE on a corner as Stellman turns it, pauses and waits.
When Haven reaches it, Stellman goes on in silence.
As Stellman reaches it, pauses and glances behind him. Then
he rings a bell. Haven comes up and waits in silence, glancing
at the dark interior. A woman's face now peers through the
door window and then the door opens. Stellman enters quickly
and Haven follows.
As Stellman and Haven follow Mrs. Caslon to a rear door.
Looking around, Haven notes in the shadows a desk and in a
corner the big safe. (This room is described in a subsequent
scene.) So as to emit the least light, Mrs. Caslon lets
Stellman and Haven go through, then quickly follows them and
quickly shuts the door.
It is remarkably neat and elegant inside. As Haven, glancing
around, pauses inside, he finds himself facing a burly
uniformed cavalry officer, captain's bars gleaming on the
side of his collar. The captain is big and broad and scowling.
He is standing by the fireplace and his eyes are boring into
Haven's with curiosity and perhaps, suspicion. Stellman steps
forward as Haven and the captain are measuring each other.
Haven gives a casual nod.
Iles looks him up and down. Haven hands him an envelope which
he slips into his tunic without removing his gaze from Haven.
They eye each other, Iles scowling, Haven thinly smiling.
The sense of conflict is already between them.
She nods and smiles warmly.
Haven nods.
He sits down. Iles is still studying Haven.
Haven nods agreeably.
Iles pulls out a cigar, lights it, sizing Haven up.
There is a tight little silence, while Iles formulates his
dislike for this newcomer.
Haven takes out his pipe and fills it.
For the first time Iles looks amicably at him, as though
realizing that after all the man isn't there to criticize
him.
He smiles slightly at Iles, who gives him a slight smile in
return, somehow intrigued by this nonchalance. Haven rises
from the chair, lighting the dead pipe in vain.
Haven glances at Mrs. Caslon, smiles back at Iles.
Iles marches out abruptly, followed by Stellman. The door
shuts. Haven smiles after him, then at Mrs. Caslon.
The door opens again, smartly, Iles marches back in, kisses
Mrs. Caslon on the cheek.
Then he marches out again, shutting the door after him.
She goes over to a sideboard and pours a little from a
decanter into two wine glasses. Haven watches her. For the
first time he realizes she is a very attractive woman. She
smiles as she brings him the wine.
Haven nods and they sip.
He starts for the door and she follows him. At the open door
he pauses.
Haven walks out and she closes the door thoughtfully and
turns away. In a moment the door opens and Haven reenters
and crosses to her much in the manner that we have seen
Captain Iles do so. Haven stops.
He turns and goes out the door. Mrs. Caslon stands smiling
after him. The smile fades for a moment -- then she dismisses
it with a shrug.
As Haven saunters along. He pauses, glances up at a sign
that reads: HOTEL. Then he enters the dingy building.
As Haven enters the small dismal lobby, and goes over to the
desk, where a little man, Orville Weekly sits, singing to
himself softly and strumming an accompaniment on a battered
guitar. As Haven stands there the clerk finishes the verse
about the stranger. Haven nods approval. The clerk looks at
him shrewdly.
Haven puts down the money; the clerk spins the registry to
him, watches as Haven signs it. And he can read that way.
The clerk spits, hands him a key.
Haven crosses to exit into the street.
As Haven enters. It is crowded. Haven pauses by a table. He
sees Charlie at the piano singing. He sees Mick cross to
Prince and say something, then Prince gazes in his direction.
Haven's eyes meet those of Prince suddenly turned to him,
cold as glass. Charlie, seeing that Haven is watching and
listening to her impromptu singing, stops and makes her way
through the crowd towards a booth off the dance floor. Haven's
eyes follow her.
MED. SHOT - of booth as Charlie sits down. A sandwich is
waiting for her. She takes a bite of it, then glances up to
see Haven standing beside the table.
Charlie glances at him, then at the crowd where Mick Marion
stands beside Prince. Both are looking coldly towards the
booth. Haven's gaze follows hers towards Mick, as Prince
leaves the big man.
She smiles slightly back at him, glances away towards Mick.
Haven looks too, curiously. Mick is still watching, coldly.
Others glance too, as though this were an unexpected thing.
Mick takes a drink from a passing waiter; kills it in one
gulp. Haven looks back at Charlie's face and smiles.
The waiter nods and leaves. Charlie is still gazing at Haven
with that slight provocative smile.
The waiter leaves, as Charlie still regards Haven with a
curious interest. Haven is glancing again toward Mick, just
as that animal barrels down another whiskey.
At this moment Prince comes into scene and sits at the table.
Haven looks at him but Charlie offers no introduction.
He glances up and a slow smile comes over his face as Mick
Marion is seen approaching deliberately and with cold menace.
Her eyes follow his, then back to his face.
Blank-faced and big, Mick arrives at the booth. He stares
from Charlie to Haven. Haven looks at him then at Charlie.
Charlie watches Haven's face, but the smile remains. It seems
to sway her, this little test of expression.
Mick is not quite sure.
Haven senses now it is a little game they're playing together
on him. His smile remains. He reaches for the bottle, his
hand grasping the base of it, just as Mick reaches for it
too, clenching the top. Mick lifts at it; Haven's hand holds.
They look at each other as this little game of strength goes
on.
That does it. Mick wrenches at the bottle, and as he does
so, Haven releases his grip. The bottle shoots up. The wine
spills over Mick's face and clothes. Infuriated, Mick flings
the bottle at Haven, but Haven ducks as he comes out of the
chair. The bottle crashes against the wall, and Haven's fist
crashes against Mick. The big man grunts and staggers back,
but he doesn't drop. As Haven sets himself, he is suddenly
pinned from behind by two bouncers. Mick stands still, staring
at him, his cut lip bleeding.
There is a dead silence. At the crap table the dice read
seven but no one looks at them, all turning toward the scene.
A minor rises and the girl on his lap hits the floor. A drunk
steals a drink and no one sees him. (Business with glass)
Prince looks on coldly. Mark Bristow, moving up from the
dice table, pauses and stares.
The two bouncers start with Haven toward the door, Mick
following. A rear rises and men begin following in their
silent wake. Only the guy at the piano keeps on playing: he
never stops.
ANGLE on Charlie as she rises. Bristow and Prince have
sauntered over to her as the place empties, leaving only the
piano player.
Prince lets go with one of his rare smiles as he looks
admiringly at Charlie. They reach the door. The crowd opens
for them a little.
As Mick and Haven come out; the crowd makes a noisy clearing.
There are bets going down. As soon as the crowd has formed
an open space, Haven wheels and smacks Mick across the face
hitting with the heel of the hand, so that Mick rocks back
almost going down. There is dead silence. Mick sets himself
for the Kill, as he peels his coat.
Bristow is shaking with excitement.
As they stare at the fight --
FULL SHOT - fight scene. As Mick is slowly advancing toward
Haven. He suddenly swings a haymaker which Haven easily ducks,
another and another that Haven evades.
Mick misses again, fiercely and Haven cracks him one in the
midriff. Then steps out fast and waits.
Mick charges and Haven catches him full in the mouth. It
stops Mick, and then Haven socks him again, this time with
the butt of his hand -- open palm -- on the nose. Mick is
surprised, tasting the blood on his hurt lips.
ANGLE on Charlie, Mark and Prince, as they watch. Charlie's
eyes are fixed with a kind of admiration on Haven. Prince
watches without interest. Mark is tense and excited.
But you feel she wishes it might...
ANGLE on the fight.
As Mick closes again, Haven stops quickly to one side,
clipping him behind the ear as he goes by. But this time
Mick keeps after Haven and finally connects. It is more of a
push than a clean hit, but even so the force of it drives
Haven off balance and he sprawls on his back. As Mick, sensing
victory, charges, Haven knows he can't get to his feet in
time, so he turns his body and springs at Mick's knees
shoulder first. The impact spills Mick on his face; before
he can recover, Haven dives on him, hands flat on his own
chest and palms turned out. His body crashes heavily, angling
across Mick's head, and Haven's savagely pushing hands mash
the other man's face into the hard ground. Then he rolls
clear and comes to his feet, breathing easily, waiting. Mick
gets up, shaking his head to clear it, mad and hurt. As he
closes ponderously in on Haven, his booted foot suddenly
shoots out. Haven twists his knee cap away but takes the
blow on the inside of his thigh, numbing the leg so that he
almost goes down. And now Mick gets to him. His great arms
close around Haven's waist, his hands locked in the small of
Haven's back. Haven braces himself against the crushing
squeeze, tensing his back muscles and stiffening his spine,
but there is nothing he can do against the implacable brute
power of the other man.
The sweat stands out on Haven's face as Mick's great strength
bends him over farther and farther. He must do something,
and soon, or his back will be cracked like a barrel stave.
Suddenly he bends his knees and lifts his feet up from off
the ground. Mick, suddenly finding Haven's full weight pulling
him forward, crashes down on top of him. With all the strength
left in him, Haven brings his knee to the pit of Mick's
stomach; as Mick's hold breaks, Haven rolls clear.
Now they are both hurt. Haven's ribs and chest are so bruised
that it is agony to take a breath. He knows it has to end
quickly or he is done for, and he goes all out. As Mick tries
to close with him again, he stands his ground and throws
pile-driver punches to Mick's midsection; as Mick finally
lowers his arms to cover his body, Haven shifts his attack
to the face. This is not Mick's style of fighting, but as he
lashes back clumsily and angrily, each time he touches Haven
it is with punishing power. Toe to toe, they slug it out,
the belt now unwound and dangling from Mick's fist, both men
groggy but both refusing to go down. Finally Mick is helpless
to protect himself, but Haven hasn't got power left to knock
him off those sturdy legs. Gathering himself, Haven hurls
his body shoulder first at Mick's chest but he miscalculates,
glances off and falls flat on his face. As he rolls over,
dogged and slow with exhaustion, he sees that his weight has
staggered Mick; the big man has taken a step back, and now
he starts to walk forward. Dazed and blind with pain, he
passes Haven, staggers forward until the tie-rail stops him.
There he stands, his hands on the rail, moving his head from
side to side like a wounded animal.
The crowd is silent now, waiting. Haven gets to his feet,
drunk with weariness. He puts a hand on Mick's shoulder, but
hasn't the strength to whirl him around. He braces himself
with one hand against the tie-rail, and almost in slow motion
pulls Mick around and clips him one last time with his
remaining strength. Mick goes down.
Before he is up he goes down again, unable to make it.
The crowd is transfixed. They can't even cheer. The two
bouncers lean over the fallen Mick.
They pick up Mick as Haven stupidly watches. Then as Haven
turns and goes away, swaying and weak, the roar rises. He
pushes aside people who try to assist him. They move aside
and watch him leave. The crowd goes back in the saloon behind
the vanquished Mick...
ANGLE on Charlie, Bristow and Prince. Prince watches the
beaten Mick go by with a smile of contempt. Charlie's eyes
are fixed on the vanishing lonely figure of Haven. Mark's
eyes are dancing.
Bristow follows Prince, wiping his forehead. Charlie remains,
looking down the now empty street where Haven vanished, a
strange soft look in her eyes, a slow smile mounting her
lips.
Orville behind his desk is strumming softly on the guitar,
his eyes following Haven as the latter slowly and somewhat
painfully walks in and across the lobby. All the way to the
desk the clerk watches Haven, strumming softly. Haven pauses
and smiles very faintly at him. The clerk puts the guitar
aside. There is a coffee pot and cup on the desk.
Orville pours it quickly.
Orville pours the "cream" from a whiskey bottle. Haven sips
gingerly.
He finishes the coffee, turns and starts for his room. Orville
tosses two towels on Haven's shoulder as the latter goes.
Strumming the guitar again softly, he watches with admiration
the retreating form of Haven.
Haven stands in the darkness only lighted by lights of the
saloon next door. He stands there looking vaguely out the
window, sucking his knuckles absently as he listens to the
piano playing. Then he goes wearily to the bed and falls on
it gratefully, shutting his eyes, the towels still across
his shoulder. There is a moment of silence and then a soft
KNOCK at the door. Another KNOCK, and painfully Haven lifts
himself on one elbow and drags out his gun. The door opens
and Charlie enters. She shuts it behind her and stands looking
at him. He lets the gun fall and turns over on his back.
Charlie walks across to the bed and stands looking down at
him.
She puts it on the table beside the bed. Haven's eyes follow
her. She sees the towels, takes them to the washstand, soaks
them and brings them back and compresses them gently on
Haven's bruised face. When she takes the towel away, he pulls
himself up a little, propped against the pillow, looking at
her curiously. She sits down on the edge of the bed.
He watches her as she wets the towels again, returns and
wraps his hands in them, sitting again on the edge of the
bed.
He is almost asleep. She takes the now unused towel and puts
it back in the basin, soaks it, returns with it and tucks it
against the side of his face.
He is sound asleep the next second. She stares at him; rises,
puts the blanket over him and goes quietly out.
Haven comes to the desk from his room. Orville is singing
another verse of the ballad. The clerk favors Haven with an
admiring smile. The coffee pot is there.
Orville strums the strings as Haven drinks, having a little
trouble with his sore hands.
He walks off. Orville ponders this, scowling into space.
Iles is pacing the floor. Mrs. Caslon is occupied with some
minor domestic chore. Stellman is standing by the door. Iles
is a ball of fire.
Stellman shrugs.
There is a knock at the door. Iles gives her a look; then
glares at Stellman.
Stellman opens the door and Haven walks in. He pauses, glances
around and smiles. Mrs. Caslon smiles at him.
She smiles and nods. Irons. Haven can feel the surcharged
air. Deliberately he assumes that casual manner that so burns
the Captain.
Iles glances sharply at Mrs. Caslon, and then to Haven.
Haven sits, wincing a little. But he beams at Iles, who now
picks a book off the table.
Haven inspects his knuckles.
He tosses the book on the table, glaring at Haven.
Iles scowls to him.
Haven goes to the door, gently touching his sore jaw. At the
door he turns.
He smiles and leaves, closing the door as he goes. Iles stands
there frozen with rage a moment. Then his face relaxes in a
grim smile. He glances at Stellman as he takes a cigar out
and bites it off.
Business is slack. Girls drink coffee and knit at a table.
Ernie polishes glasses at the bar. A colored man cleans a
crap table. All look up with curiosity and esteem as Haven
enters; all but Sam, the piano player, who goes on playing.
Haven goes to the bar. Ernie nods at him.
Haven goes to the stairs. The eyes of the girls follow him.
Top of the stairs -- as Haven reaches the door, wincing at
the climb. He KNOCKS with the heel of his hand, hurts it,
then uses his boot toe.
Haven opens the door.
This is a big corner room, the windows of which look out
over the main street. The chairs are big and there is a roll-
top desk in the corner, a big leather sofa, and on the walls
some framed pictures. At a table Prince sits. He has six
dice stacked on top of each other and he is lifting the
column. Charlie is seated behind the desk smiling. Haven
looks from one to the other.
She seems to enjoy Haven's momentary confusion. Prince is
indifferent.
Prince gives him a thin smile and rises.
Prince saunters out.
Haven sits in a big chair, very gingerly; takes out his pipe
and tobacco.
She comes over with one and lights his pipe.
She takes his hand and looks at the cut knuckle.
She walks out of the room and he watches her; then around
the room. In a moment she returns, pulls up a chair in the
front of him and sits down. She has bandages and a little
jar of ointment.
She takes one of his bruised hands, and as she bandages his
hands slowly, carefully and rather expertly, they talk.
She smiles at him and then goes on.
He watches her face.
She stands up. Haven looks at her and ignores his bandaged
hands.
Haven gets the meaning and shakes his head.
As she writes out the authorization, Haven saunters to the
window, then over to the desk. Charlie finishes and hands
him the paper. Haven scans it, pockets it.
Haven is moving to the door and she beside him. They pause.
He looks at her face, neck and hair. She looks pretty good.
Haven looks squarely at her a moment, then smiles. He reaches
out one bandaged hand and pats her shoulder.
He walks out, and Charlie remains standing there, staring
after him, just a little hazily.
As Haven walks through the wide gate into a compound. There
are several unhitched stages and freight wagons, one or two
in partial disassembly and being serviced. A colored boy is
readying a horse and buggy and beside him, overlooking the
yard activities, is a bespectacled man with rubber sleeve
garters. He is the manager. He has eyes like Armadillo and
claw-like hands; otherwise, he could be your loan agency
man. Seeing Haven he crosses to him.
The manager glances at the note, after moving his spectacles
out of the way. He gives it back without a word, and turns
toward the rear office door. Haven halts him.
Jim Goddard and Jerry enter from the rear office door. Jerry
is the younger. Goddard walks a little stiffly with the aid
of a cane.
They halt and look at Haven. The Manager jerks a thumb at
Haven.
Haven nods, after a glance at the manager.
He walks out, looking back with an awesome smile. Haven looks
curiously at Goddard, who has been standing in silence, a
thin smile on his lips.
He obeys. Haven watches and then turns to the manager.
The manager, gives them to him. Then looks at him.
He turns, takes a few steps -- and turns back to Haven.
The manager turns to go, shaking his head.
Haven, whistling softly, crosses to the colored boy who is
polishing the last specks of dust off the buggy. It is a
beautiful buggy attached to a beautiful horse. Haven pauses
and gazes at it.
The colored boy steps back and admires his work.
Haven climbs in the buggy, and the Colored Boy watches him
go.
Charlie is dressed to go somewhere. She looks much nicer in
these clothes than in her show garments of the night. She is
listening to Prince who sits in a chair, the inevitable dice
in his fingers, two this time. There is a silence except the
rattle of the cubes. Then Prince speaks coldly.
She gets up, goes to the window testily. Prince looks at her
coldly as she gazes at the street.
He looks straight at her and she stares back, staring him
down at last. As his eyes lower, she turns again to the
window.
She is silent and Prince gets up and walks out. She does not
turn. Down in the street she can see Haven riding up in the
buggy, and the hard look on her face softens to a smile as
Haven climbs out of the buggy. Some people passing stare at
him, and whisper together. His fame has spread. He walks
inside, smiling a little.
As Haven enters. There is no play at the tables. Some at the
bar. The deaf pianist is pounding the keys softly. Prince
has just descended the stairs and gone to the dice table,
where he leans, his cold eyes fixed on Haven as the latter
goes to the foot of the stairs. At this moment Charlie appears
and descends the stairs, adjusting her hat. Haven stares at
her with admiration, as she descends, smiling at him.
MED. SHOT - Haven and Charlie, as she reaches the last step.
She looks at him.
She takes his arm instead and they walk towards the door.
MOVING SHOT - Charlie and Haven, as they go.
MED. SHOT of Prince, as he stands at the table, watching
them go.
As Haven helps Charlie into the carriage.
He glances at her.
As Haven shrugs and turns the carriage to front of Bristow's
office.
The letters on the window read:
As Haven pulls up in front of it with the carriage. He goes
around and helps Charlie alight, making it a little slow for
the sake of added intimacy and causing her to smile as though
she didn't resent it.
As Charlie starts in, Mrs. Caslon comes out and they pass.
Mrs. Caslon pauses to smile and Haven tips his hat. Charlie,
flashing a backward look, sees this.
MED. SHOT of Haven and Mrs. Caslon. Haven is talking to her
with apparent casualness because he realizes that Charlie
can see him.
He watches her face as she thinks it over.
She smiles and Haven pats her shoulder.
As Bristow is talking. Charlie, looking through the window,
sees Haven and Mrs. Caslon part, Haven patting her shoulder
with that familiar gesture of his, then coming into the office
door.
Haven has entered in silence, seated himself in a chair.
Charlie does not look at him; her face, hard now, looks
straight at Bristow. He pauses as he glances at Haven with a
little nod Haven doesn't return.
He is sweating a little.
She whirls and walks out the door. Haven, fumbling for his
pipe and putting it in his teeth, follows her with a parting
glance at Bristow. For a long minute Bristow sits there alone,
his eyes staring at nothing; then as he mops the mildew of
sweat from his forehead:
As Charlie and Haven drive in the country. The road winds
between hills now and a stream tumbles along beside the
winding road. The horse is moving at a snail's pace and
Charlie is gazing around at the scenery, relaxed and
thoughtful.
She laughs. They stop and get out.
FULL SHOT as Haven helps her down the bank to the edge of
the water. She sits on the edge of a huge flat boulder and
Haven stretches out beside her.
MED. SHOT of Haven and Charlie. As she looks at the stream
and then at him.
Haven has been idly flipping pebbles into the stream. He
sees a leaf float by.
He holds out his hand and takes hers. Abruptly she starts to
rise, very piqued and unable to disguise it. Haven rises
too. Takes her hand to help her from the boulder. Then stops
and gazes at her, smiling.
She starts down; Haven moves too, but it is he who slips and
she who has to catch him. Her arms go automatically around
him. His around her. Before he can act himself, she holds
him tight and kisses him. It is a long kiss and on it we:
Orville is strumming the guitar as Haven enters. He pauses
as Haven comes near on the way to his room.
Haven halts, walks over.
He strums the strings.
He starts to his room.
Haven enters, glances around, sees the bag is missing. He
goes to the window, sees Charlie at saloon window across the
areaway. He leans out.
Charlie moves the window, smiling.
She stares at him, the smile fading on her face.
A slight pause.
She turns abruptly from the window. Haven smiles and turns
away.
Haven is finishing preparations for the ride. ANGLE ON Goddard
as he stands in shadow, watching. He carries a shotgun. As
Goddard moves from the shadow, Haven whirls, going for his
gun -- then relaxing as he recognizes the other man.
MED. SHOT of Haven and Goddard.
Haven stares at him a long moment; Goddard returns the stare
steadily.
The coach is ready. Goddard doesn't move.
Haven slowly grins at him; Goddard smiles back.
Goddard climbs up with his shotgun as Haven clambers up into
the driver's seat. As the coach turns and heads for the back
of the corral.
FULL SHOT - the stagecoach, travelling across open flat
country, heading toward the distant hills.
CLOSE SHOT - Haven and Goddard in the driver's box, keeping
an eye about him as the teams gallop along in the moonlight.
FULL SHOT as the stage rockets off into the darkness.
The stage is now heading uphill, the gentle slope at the
beginning of the foothills.
The road is steeper now, and winding.
ANOTHER ANGLE. The road is cut out of the side of the
mountain, leaving a sheer slope on one side, and high, thick
trees and brush on the other. As the stage follows a bend in
the road, a rider leaps out and grabs the lead horse. The
stage lurches crazily and almost overturns as it slows to a
stop. Before Haven can free his hands from the reins to go
for his gun, two shadowy figures, handkerchiefs helping the
darkness mask their faces, have jumped out onto the road
ahead and have him covered.
Haven and Goddard raise their arms. Another bandit, from the
hillside, calls out:
Two shotgun barrels cover the side of the stags. Goddard
gets off, hands in air.
Haven obeys, to join Goddard in the road, as the bandits
converge on the stage. There are five or six of them. Two
come up behind Haven and Goddard.
The sacks are being loaded on a pack horse. Haven turns
around.
He gives Goddard a none too gentle shove. Goddard moves on
up the road in the darkness.
A FEW YARDS UP THE ROAD. Mick is waiting by his horse, his
gun drawn. We hear the steps of Goddard and the bandit.
The footsteps halt. Mick aims and fires.
BY WAGON. There is a half grunt, half groan from Goddard.
Haven turns as if to protest and then crumples as a gun fells
him.
CLOSE SHOT - Haven, lying face down on the ground,
unconscious.
As day breaks.
CLOSE SHOT - Haven. Haven comes to, gradually clearing the
cobwebs. Then suddenly he remembers Goddard and the shot. He
makes his way to where Goddard's body lies a few feet up the
road. Goddard's right hand is half in his hip pocket, as if
in his last dying moment he was reaching for something. As
Haven pulls the hand out, he sees that Goddard's fingers
have closed around his wallet. Puzzled, Haven opens the
wallet. There is a stiff-backed daguerreotype of his wife,
an expired Union Pacific Railroad pass, an express receipt,
a souvenir bank-note of the Confederacy, and a small, closely-
folded piece of paper. Unfolding this, Haven sees the top
line:
"To Whom It May Concern"
"This certifies that the bearer, James Goddard, is operating
as a legally deputized detective for Wells Fargo Stage and
Express Company."
Haven replaces the papers and lifts Goddard's body, carries
it to the stage and places it on the floor. He removes
Goddard's gun and shell belt and straps it on, closing the
stage door. Haven's face is grim as he studies the ground
nearby. The sticky mud shows clearly the new tracks of the
bandits' horses. As he starts unhitching one of his horses
from the wagon traces, we
A tiny clearing on a brush-filled knoll, where the remains
of a cooking fire are still visible, the ashes scattered
over the tamped-down ground. CAMERA PANS OVER TO Haven, on
horseback, as he studies the scene. This is where he evidently
made camp for the night. He dismounts, sifts the ashes through
his fingers to feel their warmth. He cannot be far behind.
Then he turns his attention to the trail loading away.
Inspection reveals that it divides, one group of fresh tracks
heading towards town, another smaller group further into the
mountains. He decides to follow the latter. As he mounts and
rides off:
A high spot from which Haven can get a good view. Off in the
distance he sees:
LONG SHOT - FROM his ANGLE. A lone rider, leading a pack
horse, barely visible through the timber. He is heading away
from him.
CLOSE SHOT - Haven. He spurs his horse forward.
FULL SHOT - Haven, in pursuit of the man ahead.
The bandit, unaware of his pursuer, puts his horse and the
gold-laden pack horse through the stream. He comes out into
a meadow on the other side.
PAN SHOT - WITH Haven, as he comes to the stream. Half way
across, his horse momentarily loses his footing on the
slippery rocks.
MED. SHOT - bandit. Hearing the noise of Haven's horse, he
turns and sees his pursuer, takes a quick shot back at him,
then heads for the other side of the meadow where there will
be shelter, firing back as he rides.
MED. CLOSE SHOT - Haven. He takes careful and deliberate aim
and fires.
FULL SHOT - FROM Haven's ANGLE. The bandit is almost at the
edge of the woods when Haven's shot gets him. He tumbles
from the saddle. Haven rides forward, gun ready in case it
is a trick.
It is no trick. The bandit is down where he fell. When Haven
turns him over, the man's eyes are already glazed. Haven
puts his lips close to the dying man's ear.
The man only glares up at him. Haven tries again.
The man holds Haven's gaze defiantly and silently as the
life goes out of him. Haven lowers him back to the ground,
rifles his pocket. There are no papers on him, no
identification. He stands up. He has the gold back, but he
is no closer to rounding up the whole gang than he was before.
Unless -- he is looking at the horses, placidly grazing. He
goes up to them, ties up the loose lead reins, draws his
belt off, and gives them each a sharp crack on the rump with
the buckle. They take off across the meadow at a gallop.
Haven lets them get a good start before he mounts his own
horse, and follows after them.
As Haven rides up to the edge of a downslope, gazes over a
broad valley, and sees:
LONG VIEW of a sawmill, nestled in the valley. It comprises
several sheds and buildings, with a long rank of stacked
logs beside the biggest shed, and all this is serviced by a
dirt road along which the two horses canter up to the camp.
Haven observes several men come out of the main office and
snag the two horses.
As two men who have snagged the horses now take off the gold
bags. In front of the office Pete, the camp boss, Ben and
Sam, two tough-looking accomplices, stand watching and
glancing up the road down which the horses came. There is a
frown on Pete's face.
Pete looks thoughtfully at Joe's horse, pats his neck, again
locks up the road.
Two men mount and start away.
CLOSE SHOT of Haven. As he moves back out of sight. Obviously
he can't move into the camp now. Glancing off down the valley
he sees in the distance a work wagon approaching. It is still
hidden from sight of the sawmill by high ground between. He
puts his horse down the slope towards the approaching wagon,
at a tangent to the camp.
As the work wagon lumbers along. Its markings identify it as
belonging to the stageline Haven now manages. We recognize
Jerry the driver as Haven rides up. Jerry gives him a grin
and a salute.
He climbs down as Haven dismounts and turns the horse over
to Jerry.
Haven watches him ride away, then climbs aboard the wagon.
Picking up the reins, he notices the bandages on his hands
and, not wanting to be identified by them, rips them off.
Blowing on his still sore knuckles, he drives toward the
sawmill.
As Haven's wagon lumbers in. He looks curiously at the main
office. No one is in sight, but as he draws nearer, the
swarthy hard-faced man, Pete, comes out on to the porch.
Haven looks at him.
Haven flicks the reins, moves on. Pete watches suspiciously.
Haven moves on to the cook shack outside of which the cook
is busy dumping a pail of slop.
Haven pulls up by the warehouse next door and gets down.
There is nobody around, so he starts wrestling with the food
crates himself, taking the first one into the warehouse.
It is big, barnlike, piled with provisions and equipment.
Haven stares around; carries the crate to where a similar
stack of crates are piled. Lowering the crate he notes a
shiny object, picks it up. It is a button from an army
uniform. He pockets it as his attention is distracted by two
horsemen passing outside. Haven goes out to continue
unloading.
As the two horsemen ride up to Pete and dismount. Ben and
Sam are standing there.
He glances toward the wagon where Haven is working.
The five men move down to Haven's wagon.
ANGLE ON wagon and Haven, as he sees them come. His lip
tightens; then he relaxes and goes on lifting a crate. He
pauses as they come up and stand around him, their eyes fixed
on:
Haven looks at him.
It is a risky little moment; Haven eases both bruised hands
into his coat pockets.
Pete's face relaxes; as do the grim faces of the others.
They start unloading and Haven goes to the cook house. Pete
watches him go. Ben notes it.
He lends a hand with Ben and Sam.
A big pot of stew is simmering on the fire. The cook is busy
slicing french fries. Haven enters.
Haven begins ladling out some stew into a bowl, tastes it.
Haven shrugs and takes more stew; the cook goes on cutting
the potatoes.
Haven takes another gulp in the silence that follows. Then
he says carelessly:
Ben's head appears in the doorway.
Haven takes a last mouthful, turns toward the door.
The cook isn't interested; he spits as he slices a potato.
Pete, Sam and Ben are waiting beside the gear box as we see
Haven bringing the wagon up.
They watch Haven as he pulls up the wagon. Pete looks hard
at his face. Haven has the pipe in his mouth again, looking
very blandly at them.
Haven climbs aboard. They look hard at him. He has stuck his
pipe in his mouth. He smiles at them and he picks up the
reins.
Haven pauses.
Haven flicks the reins, grins at them and drives off. Ben is
still worried and stares after the departing wagon.
This is deserted country on the way to town. When the land
slopes steeply from the road down into a kind of wash, Haven
halts the wagon. He glances around. No sign of life. He takes
a hammer and chisel out of the tool box beside the seat,
crawls to the crate and prys it open. His cargo is gold.
Satisfied, he replaces the pried board, then pushes the crate
over the side. It topples down the bank, vanishes in the
brush at the bottom of the wash. With one more glance around,
Haven resumes his seat in the wagon, puts a match to his
pipe, and sends the horses forward at a faster clip.
Iles is pacing up and down as Stellman enters quietly. Iles
promptly faces him.
Stellman turns and leaves obediently.
SHOT FROM Haven's ANGLE to include street activity. As Mark
approaches, opens the door and enters.
As Mark enters in the semi-darkness and pauses, stiff with
fright at the sight of Haven sitting in the chair, a gun in
his hand. Mark opens his mouth but can't speak.
Numbly, Mark obeys; then turns.
Mark lights the lamp. His voice is small and quavering.
Mark pours a drink shakily from a decanter by his law library.
Mark gulps his in an ominous silence.
Haven puts the gun away; rises, walks to the desk, pours a
drink for himself. Mark watches him shrewdly.
He saunters to the window -- glances through the crack of
the shades. When he turns, he notes that Mark has paper and
pencil ready.
He pauses, looks stonily at the face of Mark, who is staring
at him curiously and waiting.
Mark stares in amazement.
Mick is standing outside, holding the arm of Jerry as he
talks to the kid. Beside him stands Pete Yore's man, Ben.
As Haven finishes his statement. He is again at the window,
glancing out. Perhaps he has seen the incident with Mick and
Jerry across the crowded street.
He turns back into the room. Mark is looking at him with
puzzled wonder, his face drawn and tense.
He smiles slightly. The wonder leaves Mark's face. Urbane
cunning replaces it.
Mark smiles thinly, licking his lips.
Haven lights the pipe.
He strolls back towards his room and CAMERA FOLLOWS him, the
strumming of the guitar again SOUNDING in the b.g.
Haven shuts the door, pulls off his boots and gun belt, lies
on the bed and stares at the ceiling. His face is sad and he
looks tired. The MUSIC from the saloon comes over, Charlie's
song... he closes his eyes and in a moment falls asleep...
As iles rides up. He is just about to enter, after
dismounting, when Mark Bristow comes out of the office. Mark
smiles and nods at the officer.
Mark mounts his horse, drives away.
As Iles opens the door and enters. Mrs. Caslon is her usual
cool self as she sits at her desk. Iles crosses to her and
gives her a peck on the cheek as she fondly pats his hand.
He sits in a comfortable chair, conscious of the fact that
she had ignored his reference to Bristow.
Iles gives her a surly look, takes a cheroot out of his tunic.
Iles is about to yell something at her, then holds himself
in check, while she wipes the spilled ashes from his uniform.
In this interlude he changes to an icy man.
He walks to the door. She stands there frigidly.
He turns and fumbles with the knob, but he can't do it. He
turns at last and walks meekly back to her.
She turns to the desk and hands him the long legal envelope.
Iles takes it and stares at it. He starts to open it.
He opens it, looks.
He hands it to her. She reads.
He takes back the paper from her, thrusts a blank sheet in
the envelope, tosses the envelope back on the desk.
Iron-faced, he starts out, remembers again, softens against
his will, comes back from the door and kisses her cheek and
then leaves. CAMERA stays on Mrs. Caslon as she watches him
go. She smiles slightly, puts the envelope in the safe, and
then from it takes a six-gun, looks at it and begins dusting
it with her handkerchief as we
Haven begins washing his face in the washbowl, and then
combing his hair and readjusting his somewhat rumpled shirt.
Mark watches him.
There is a little nervous sweat on Mark's hands; he wipes
them on his coat.
A little shaken and uncertain, Mark obeys.
As Haven and Mark come out. They walk towards the saloon.
People look at them curiously. Suddenly, down the street,
the sheriff appears, approaching Haven slowly and ominously.
Sensing a gun fight, people vanish. Purely from instinct,
Mark deserts Haven's side in a hurried walk towards the
saloon, eyeing both. Haven comes on leisurely. The sheriff
has stopped in his tracks and has his gun out. A woman
clutches her child to her skirt. Men stand stockstill,
watching. A crowd forms at the entrance to Charlie's. Haven
walks slowly forward until he reaches the waiting sheriff.
He looks him over with a smile of contempt.
Haven hands him back the now loaded gun and walks away towards
the saloon, leaving the sheriff standing there, a completely
dumbfounded and bepuzzled man.
The place is roaring. Haven enters, followed by Mark. The
guy at the piano is playing as always. Haven and Mark go
slowly to the bar, eyes following them. The noise softens
almost to silence, except the piano, Cowering, Mark sticks
close to Haven.
At the dice table, Prince stares coldly, hands another man
the stick and walks away to the stairway, his eyes seeking
Mick Marion who is also staring at Haven. Prince nods to
Mick as he goes.
MED. SHOT at bar -- as Haven and Mark loan against it. Ernie
is looking at him curiously; then towards Mick. Haven doesn't
follow the glance, but Mark does.
Ernie gets them. Haven glances at the piano. Mick who had
stood there has now vanished. Haven smiles. The drinks arrive.
Mark finishes off his second. A stickman comes up. Nudges
Haven.
The stickman moves away. Mark looks at Haven.
Haven turns away towards the stairs. Mark hesitates, bites
his lip, swallows another drink and then grimly follows.
Charlie is behind her desk, as Haven walks in. Behind him,
sweating now, comes Mark. As the two are in the room the
door behind them slams shut. Mick is there with a gun. Prince
moves slightly out of a shadow. Mark backs against a wall.
Charlie looks up from her fingernails. Haven smiles and
glances around. His eyes fix on Mick and the gun.
Mick says nothing, his face a blank hatred. Haven sits down
in a big chair.
Another door opens and Pete, the sawmill foreman, enters,
stands silently. Haven glances at him, then at Charlie who
smiles thinly back.
Mark relapses into a perspiring silence.
Charlie stares at him a moment. Then she glances at Pete.
Pete walks out.
Mick burns in silence. Charlie smiles.
Haven nods.
Charlie is silent a moment. Haven lights his pipe. Charlie
looks at Mark, pale by the wall.
She looks coolly at Mick and Mark.
Mark glances at Haven who nods and Mark leaves in the wake
of the grimly departing Mick. Prince lingers.
Prince gets up grimly, his lips tight, the dice held hard in
his fingers. He stares at Haven.
He turns and walks out. Haven watches him go.
Charlie comes around and sits on the arm of his chair.
She brushes his cheek with her lips.
He rises and so does she. She picks up a scarf in silence
and anger, crosses and goes out the door, Haven following
her.
As Haven and Charlie descend. Her face is hard.
As they descend, Stellman can be seen in the bar crowd,
watching them.
MED. SHOT of Charlie and Haven at foot of stairs. Haven is
smiling at her, but her face is serious and her eyes hard.
Haven smiles. He can see Stellman approaching.
He starts away, but Stellman halts him.
Haven looks at him. Charlie watches.
Haven stares at him, then looks at Charlie. A slow smile
dawns on her face.
He pats Charlie's shoulder and then walks out with Stellman.
Charlie watches them go. Prince appears beside her.
She walks away towards the piano. Prince stands there,
watching Haven go.
Note: Pick up two night exteriors of the post.
There is a sergeant inside facing Iles who sits behind his
desk. Stellman and Haven pause at the door.
The Sergeant exits. Iles looks calmly and with relish at
Haven.
Haven and Stellman enter. Stellman closes the door and stands
near it. Haven smiles and nods at Iles, then sits down
unbidden.
Iles picks up the deposition, extends it.
Haven glances at him, then at the statement, and then tosses
it on the desk and inhales.
They look hard at each other in silence.
Haven turns and walks out; the door closes behind him. Iles
slumps down into his chair. Stellman is smiling faintly at
him.
As Stellman turns away.
As Haven saunters in. Orville is, as always, behind the desk.
Haven nods at him.
He goes and Orville strums a little jail song.
Haven, driving a wagon and team of horses, is retracing the
road he took back from the sawmill looking for the place
where he dumped the bullion.
CLOSER VIEW of Haven, as he looks for the landmarks. He is
whistling softly the tune that Charlie always sings. At last
he stops, alights and makes his way down the steep slope, a
couple of gunny sacks slung across his shoulder.
Bottom of the gulley as Haven gets there and locates the
crate at rest in a clump of brush. The crate has broken from
the fall. Haven loads the buckskin bags of gold into the
gunny sack and scrambles back up the slope.
Side of slope as Haven scrambles to the top, he finds himself
looking into a six-shooter held in the unwavering hand of
Mrs. Caslon. Her eyes are hard and a grim smile plays at the
corners of her mouth.
Haven obeys.
Haven turns. She takes his gun and tosses it in the wagon;
then glances inside the sack, sees the gold. She backs off a
step or two.
Haven turns to obey. He manages a smile at her.
He struggles with the sack, swings it onto the wagon in which
he came. Then stands back, looking at her.
She climbs to the seat of the wagon watching him warily.
Haven doesn't move.
She grabs the rein of her own horse, flicks the reins of the
wagon team and rides away, leaving Haven on the road,
horseless and very much discountenanced. He watches grimly
as she rides away. At a distance from him she tosses his gun
beside the road.
As Haven enters. He is dusty and tired from his long walk.
The place is moderately busy.
MED. SHOT of Haven as he sits tiredly at a table where Charlie
and Prince are sitting. She smiles at him.
The waiter exits. Charlie looks at Haven curiously.
He takes out the pipe, twirls it in his fingers. The waiter
puts down the champagne. Charlie is looking at Haven with
puzzlement and curiosity. The waiter goes...
Her face changes; hardens. She glances across at Prince.
Haven watches Prince with a smile.
There is a silence. Prince stares idly at the dice cubes in
his hand. Charlie stares straight at Haven. Haven glances at
Prince.
Prince just stares at him.
Haven takes a sip of the champagne, Charlie's whole manner
has now changed. It is cold and very quiet.
Haven reaches in his pocket for a match. Prince, mistaking
the gesture, swiftly extracts a small pistol from his belt,
covers him.
Haven extracts the match, with a glance of contempt at Prince;
then lights the pipe again.
There is a brief silence that punctuates this statement. It
has an air of fatal finality, marked by the idle MUSIC of
the deaf pianist. Haven puts his pipe away, carefully so
that Prince won't get any mistaken ideas.
Haven rises. He brushes some dust off his coat, smiles thinly
at Charlie.
She says nothing; her face carved out of ice. Prince smiles
thinly. Haven looks at him, shrugs. He hesitates; then pats
Charlie's frigid shoulder.
He turns and walks slowly out. The dirge of the piano follows
him. Prince fingers his pistol a little, tempted. At a look
from Charlie he puts it away. Haven goes out. Charlie suddenly
leaves the tables and goes quickly up the stairs. Prince
watches her with a slow smile, picks up Haven's gun and
pockets it...
As Haven leaves the saloon. He pauses, looks around, up at
the sky, then down the street. He takes out his pipe and
beginning filling it slowly with tobacco, as Mark Bristow
comes hurrying across the street.
MOVING SHOT of Haven as he walks very slowly, filling the
pipe, and Mark comes alongside and walks with him. Haven
hardly glances at him.
MED. SHOT of Haven and Mark outside the hotel. Mark is afraid
and puzzled. He keeps staring at Haven's face.
He pauses as two men walk by.
Mark's mouth pops open.
Haven lights the pipe. Mark stands there, mouth open; fear
draining the blood from his face. His voice is a mere whisper.
Mark stares at him, then looks off. His face becomes grim.
He almost glares back at Haven.
Mark stares at him, then turns abruptly away. He hurries
across the street. Haven watches him as he goes off in the
direction of Mrs. Caslon. Haven smiles and walks inside the
hotel.
He enters, locks the door. Pulls the shade at the window,
takes off his shoes and coat and lies down on the bed. He
gazes towards the wall, thoughtfully. He gets up, goes to
the window, opens it softly; then looks out. Down the alley,
at the corner, a man is lounging; an ugly looking character,
whose eyes watch the alleyway. Haven smiles wryly, goes back
to the bed and lies down. The piano music starts next door.
Showing the deaf pianist at the piano, playing. CAMERA PICKS
UP Pete as he enters, FOLLOWS him as he walks up the stairs.
As Pete knocks on Charlie's office door, then enters.
As Pete enters. He looks around. Mick is sitting there and
Prince. Charlie is standing at the window. By another door
another grim character stands in silence. Charlie turns as
Peter enters.
Pete turns and walks out, shutting the door behind him. There
is silence. Charlie looks out the window again. Prince fools
with the dice. Mick stands stolidly near the door. At last
the silence is broken over the ticking of the wall clock.
She has not turned from the window. The clock ticks. From
behind her Mick's voice comes, quiet and deadly.
Mick is silent. Charlie smiles thinly.
As Mark hurries into the saloon, a desperate look on his
face.
As Charlie turns from the window.
Mick goes to the door, opens it; just as Mark arrives a little
breathlessly at the door. Mark enters, a little surprised at
the door opening for him, glancing back as Mick quietly shuts
it. Charlie looks coldly at the lawyer who is sweating again.
Mark stands there, silent a moment, gathering himself
together.
She has turned to the safe; now she turns with them and as
Mark reaches for them, Charlie drops them at his feet. They
scatter. He bends to pick them up. Prince smiles at him
contemptuously. Mark is picking them up one at a time when
suddenly he pauses, stands erect, and looks at them with
fear and suspicion.
Mark stands there. The papers slip from his fingers. He knows
what Prince means. But his mouth hardens in an effort.
Hands it to her.
She hands him the paper from the envelope. Marks takes it
and stares at it. It is absolutely a blank piece of paper.
He stands there, bites his lips. He looks wearily around at
them, fear making him weak, making him unable to hold the
piece of paper, so that it floats to the carpet.
He stops dead in his tracks as Charlie moves towards him
with a little pistol, pearl-handled. But she only gives it
to him. She has to take his hand and put it in his palm.
He backs out, the little gun in his hand. Mick opens the
door. In sudden relief and haste Mark barrels out. They can
hear his quick feet on the stairs outside. Prince looks at
Charlie.
Prince gets up and leaves, and Mick, with a grim smile of
anticipation follows. Charlie sits slowly down in the chair.
The music comes up the stairs and through the door.
Haven is lying on the bed, his arms under his head, his eyes
on the ceiling. There is a SOUND in the hallway and then a
hurried knock at the door. Haven slowly rises, walks to the
door. He stands there. The knock SOUNDS again.
Haven opens the door. Mark enters swiftly, the little gun in
his hand. Haven shuts the door and locks it. He turns and
faces Mark, now pointing the gun. Without a word Haven walks
over to the bed and lies down again, looking at the ceiling.
Mark follows him with the gun.
Haven leans on one elbow, looking at him.
Haven lies back with a short laugh. Mark stares at him in
fury.
Haven again leans on one elbow, looking at Mark and the
trembling hand that holds the gun.
Mark sits slowly back in the chair, beaten.
Haven gets up slowly, reaches over and takes the little gun,
smiles at it.
He puts the gun on the table. Mark's teeth are chattering.
He is almost ready to cry. Haven gets a bottle and pours him
a drink in a dusty glass. He hands it to Mark.
Mark gets up waveringly. Takes another hooker.
Mark stares at him. Haven smiles grimly back.
Mark hurries out into the hall. Goes. Haven turns back and
looks at the room, picks up the little pistol, smiles at it.
Shrugs and then slips into his coat and exits, too.
As Haven enters. SHOOTING FROM his ANGLE, we can see, as he
does, Mark crossing the street, apparently towards his law
office. He is in such a hurry that he falls down, crawls a
little, gets up, runs. Just as he reaches the office door,
just as his hand touches the knob, a shot rings out and he
crumples. He still tries, then his hand slips from the knob
and he lies there dead. The vacant street is empty with his
death. Haven stares. He takes a match from the counter,
applies it to his pipe -- then finding the pipe empty, smiles
thinly and pockets it
He takes the little pistol from his pocket and glances at
it. The clerk, watching, idly strumming the guitar string.
Haven smiles. He feels in his pocket, comes out with the
army button gotten at the sawmill.
The clerk stares at him; Haven smiles grimly. He breaks the
little gun, checks it.
He starts to the door, the little gun in hand; very slowly.
Watching him, the clerk twangs the strings softly. Haven
walks very slowly. He opens the door and hesitates. Just as
he is about to step out, looking up and down the street,
there is a furor and the sheriff rides up outside and
dismounts. Starts over to inspect Mark's body. He turns as
Haven walks on to the street, hands held high.
As Haven emerges and the Sheriff holds a gun on him.
ANGLE on Mick as down the street, with disgust, he lowers
his gun.
ANGLE on Prince as from a doorway he watches. Stopping with
a shake of his head the intent of a man beside him to shoot.
FULL SHOT -- street -- as Haven surrenders to the sheriff.
Haven obeys, walking up the street -- the sheriff and the
sheriff's horse behind him. People watch, appearing now in
safety. The sheriff is pretty pleased.
MOVING SHOT -- of Haven and Sheriff. As they go, Haven's
hands still aloft.
Back of them can now be seen the figures of Mick and Prince
and the other gunman, following at a little distance. Going
leisurely, now Haven slows his pace so that the sheriff is
closer behind him.
Haven suddenly drops to his knees. The sheriff almost walks
over him. The sheriff stumbles with an oath. Haven grapples
with him. Haven snatches his gun, drags him by a headlock to
the horse, flings him aside and then mounts. A second later
he is away. Shots RING OUT as Mick and Prince and the gunman
shoot. Haven rides on, bent low, out of town. The sheriff
hides his bulk in the dust as the bullets fly.
ANGLE from Charlie's office -- as she goes to the window,
stares out at the flying form of Haven. A slow smile comes
over her face, bitter and grim, yet somehow faintly
admiring... She sees Mick mount a horse and start after Haven.
Then she turns abruptly away.
As Haven slows down his horse, but goes on at a fair clip
after looking warily back. He breaks open the sheriff's gun,
finds it loaded. He reacts and whistles softly. As he swings
his horse off the travelled road to head crosscountry for
the sawmill.
As Haven sits on his horse at a point in the woods where he
can look down on the sawmill. Around the mill office there
seems to be signs of unusual activity. Haven sees Mick Marion
going by on the road towards the mill. Mick passes not far
away and is riding hard. Haven watches as Mick arrives and
Pete can be seen in conference with him. Other men -- too
many -- are gathered around. At last Haven dismounts and
makes his way carefully on foot towards the warehouse.
As Haven leaves his horse in the brush and trees and then
approaches the building. He finds a window in back, breaks
it with a stone; then waits tensely to see if the sound has
attracted any attention, gun in hand now. It doesn't. Haven
replaces the gun in his holster, opens the window and crawls
inside.
Haven surveys the piles of crates, boxes and equipment. He
starts his search methodically and swiftly. Suddenly a shaft
of light comes from the front doors opened now by two men.
Haven shrinks back, drawing his gun. The men start to enter
when Pete's voice is heard.
The men turn and leave. Haven relaxes. He goes back to work,
pulls back a big canvas tarpaulin one of the men had
approached, and there before him is revealed the army
uniforms, stacked in neat piles. He looks and smiles grimly.
Outside is the SOUND of horses and more men arriving. Haven
goes slowly around the warehouse now, looking for something.
At last he finds it: a can of kerosene. He takes it over to
the uniforms, pours it liberally on them. At just this moment
a figure appears at the door.
Haven lights a match and tosses it on the soaked bales of
uniforms. They blaze up instantly. The man shoots as Haven
ducks away.
As the shot RINGS out. Pete and Mick, surrounded by many
men, turn swiftly. Flame and smoke emerge from the warehouse.
They start swiftly across, drawing guns. The man at the door
shoots again into the smoking interior. An answering SHOT
from Haven fells him.
As Haven makes his way back to the open window. He crawls
out swiftly. Now the building is in flames. He can hear
shouting and, as he moves away, the useless attempt of men
to put out the blaze, working with buckets of water.
As Haven starts for the woods. The flames now light the ground
around, and Pete appears around the side of the building.
Pete fires and Haven draws and shoots. Pete whirls away, hit
but still on his feet, driving forward, trying to shoot again
and this time Haven drills him clean and Pete goes down to
stay. Other men come up as Haven makes for the woods,
disappears.
Mick Marion and a dozen men appear, shooting. Mick suddenly
changes his mind, turns past the body of Pete, gets his horse
and heads back to town full tilt.
As Haven watches the flaming building. The slowly approaching
figures of the men are illumined in the big light of the
fire. Haven smiles, turns to the horse and moves slowly
through the trees to a place where he can mount; then mounts
and rides for it, SHOTS following him as he breaks into the
clear some hundred yards away and heads for the road that
Mick Marion took back to town. Bent low, Haven rides for his
life -- and makes it...
As Haven rides up, a detachment of men supervised by Stellman
is forming beside mounts in the parade ground. Haven dismounts
and starts inside. He glances at his wagon parked outside.
It is the one Mrs. Caslon took from him. He smiles slightly
as he notes it.
Haven walks in, brushes past the desk sergeant with a cursory
nod and enters Iles' sanctum.
As Haven enters. Mrs. Caslon is there, and Iles, in full
field uniform. They look at him quickly as he enters; he
pauses, glances at Mrs. Caslon and then faces the explosive
Iles.
As Iles stares, dumbfounded, at this impertinence:
Iles gawks at him.
Iles nods vaguely.
Haven dips into a lining pocket under his arm and tosses a
paper at Iles. Iles glances at it, then looks, thunderstruck,
at Haven.
ILES' expression slowly changes. He smiles at last.
He shakes hands with Iles for second, then Iles goes out
abruptly. Outside we can hear abrupt commands to the Sergeant
before the door closes. Haven takes out his pipe, looks at
the silent, dumb-struck Mrs Caslon. He smiles at her slightly.
She gets her voice at last.
Outside "To Horse" is sounding. Haven glances out the window,
hardly aware of Mrs Caslon's presence.
She goes to the desk, gets it and hands it to him. He takes
the gun from his holster and hands it to her.
She takes it.
He puts his own gun in holster. Glances out the window.
He pats her shoulder in a gesture of goodbye and walks out
the door. She stands watching him, then moves to the window
and looks out.
As Haven walks outside towards his waiting horse. He pauses,
pipe in mouth, lighting the pipe now, his face intensely
interested as he watches the men form on the parade ground
in front of the mounted Iles and Stellman.
FULL SHOT of soldiers. As they mount to a brisk command, and
the color bearer takes position. Iles barks out a command;
the column forms into marching order. On the double quick,
the cavalry company starts out and on the way.
CLOSE SHOT of Haven as he watches; his eyes lighting a little,
the pipe in hand. We feel that he'd like to go too in this
moment.
ANOTHER ANGLE from Haven's view, as the column of cavalry
departs. Haven waves his hand, a half salute, a half gesture
to Iles as Iles salutes him in passing. Then only the dust
remains and Haven's gaze lingers. His face changes. It becomes
grim. He slowly knocks the ashes from the pipe, pockets it.
He slowly mounts the horse. He takes out his gun and checks
it. Then slowly he rides away, like a man on a mission he
dislikes but cannot evade.
As Mrs. Caslon looks out the window. Her face, tense, as she
watches the lonely figure go; her hand waves slightly.
Charlie is standing by the desk and window. Prince is sitting
there, talking, the inevitable dice in his fingers.
THERE is SOUND of massed horses outside and Charlie looks
out. Prince walks to the window. They look in silence.
As Iles rides by at full gallop, followed by a troop of
cavalry, headed for the sawmill.
As they watch. Prince turns away.
Prince crosses to the window and stands looking at Charlie.
Charlie looks at him but does not answer and then she turns
to the window, and smiles slightly. Prince follows her gaze
to the street. His face is grim.
Haven, mounted, is coming up the street. Slowly and carefully
he progresses to the front of the saloon.
As Charlie glances at Prince.
He turns and goes quietly and swiftly from the room. Charlie
stands thoughtfully. There is nothing in her look or manner
to indicate that what Prince has said has made the slightest
impression on her.
As Haven comes up to the saloon door.
As Prince moves into a shadowy corner.
ANGLE ON the door as Haven enters and looks around. He sees
no one. The place seems utterly deserted. It is soundless.
CAMERA FOLLOWS Haven as he moves slowly. He has replaced the
gun, but he is alert.
ANGLE ON Prince as he watches Haven, now a perfect target,
not looking in his direction. Prince raises the gun a little,
but the dice in his over hand click ever so faintly.
SHOT OF Haven as he stops dead in his tracks, hand on the
gun again, alert at the slight sound of the dice. Now facing
towards the shadow where Prince is hidden. He stands ready
and rigid for a long still moment. When there is no further
sound or movement, he goes on towards the stairs.
ANGLE ON Prince as he moves slightly from the shadow as Haven
goes to the stairs. Prince is ready to shoot again, but now
the angle on Haven up the stairs is no good. He lowers the
gun with disgust, then moves softly out of the shadow.
She gets a gun out of the drawer, looks at it, smiles, drops
it back into the drawer, moves around the desk and faces the
door, composing herself and waiting.
As Haven pauses, pushes it open. Then walks slowly in.
She is standing with her back to the desk, her fingers tight
on the edge of the desk as Haven walks in. He stops and looks
around and then at her. There is a slight smile on her face.
He hands her the little derringer she had given to Mark.
She puts the little gun on the desk.
He hands her the paper he showed Iles. She just glances at
it without touching it. Smiles at him.
Her eyes pass him towards the door behind him.
At the bare rustle of SOUND behind him (and the memory of
her eyes going past him) Haven whirls, stopping aside and
drawing as he does so. And just as he does so, Prince, in
the doorway, fires. Haven shoots so that the shots RING OUT
almost simultaneously. Prince topples forward on his knees
and then his face. The dice roll out of his unclenched left
hand.
MED. SHOT of Haven and Charlie as their eyes read the dice.
Haven puts away the gun. Charlie is still leaning against
the desk, but there is a strange look on her face. A thin
smile for Haven. Now she sags a little and Haven realizes
she has been hit. He starts to her and she turns away towards
the couch. He catches her as she sags again, and helps her
down gently on the couch.
ANGLE on couch as Haven kneels beside her. He starts to pull
away the top of her dress, but the wound is close to the
heart. She shakes her head.
Haven knows it. He takes her hand and squeezes it.
Haven stares grimly at her face. She gives him a faint smile.
She holds herself tight a moment; then looks at him again,
the faint smile returning.
She starts to die. He takes her shoulders in his hands as
though to kiss her or hold her back to life. Her voice is
almost a whisper.
She goes, slumping back. He sits there, pats her shoulder in
a familiar absent-minded way, then slowly rises. Grimly,
Haven walks out of the room.
MOVING SHOT as Haven goes down the stairway. The deaf pianist
is playing as always.
Orville is at his old seat behind the desk. He is playing
the last verse of the ballad. Haven enters and crosses to
his bag, his face blank and grim. He picks up his bag, turns
and walks out, as though not hearing the guitar and the
ballad. As he goes into the street --

CLOSE SHOT -- station signboard. It reads:
CAMERA PANS to show the dusty platform of a typical small
Arizona town of the late nineties.
CAMERA TRUCKS ALONG platform PAST a line of sleeping figures,
consisting of a couple of drunks, an Indian, two Mexicans
and a mongrel dog.
CAMERA STOPS on the window of the ticket office. Inside the
office can be glimpsed the Station Agent dozing in a chair
with his feet up against the grill of the ticket window. The
clicking of the signal indicator is heard. The agent opens
his eyes, flips up the indicator and begins to get to his
feet sleepily.
line of sleeping figures, with dog in f.g. The sound of a
distant train whistle is heard o.s. The dog, which up to now
might have been dead, opens one eye and looks past camera.
railway track with the three-car train approaching.
line of sleeping figures. The dog jumps up barking furiously
and runs out of shot past camera. The sleeping figures come
to life and look toward camera. At the same time, the door
of the ticket office opens and the agent appears.
railway track. The train is now almost at the station.
FULL SHOT -- with the line of men now standing on the edge
of the platform looking toward camera. Train steams slowly
in past camera, and stops, with a tall, wide-shouldered man
of about 28 (Rocklin), dressed in new store clothes, cowboots
and a broad-brimmed white hat, in f. g. standing on steps of
day coach with a small valise and saddle in his hands. Behind
Rocklin a conductor.
baggage car. The baggageman is standing at the open door of
the car with two sacks of mail. He drops them to the platform
and waves to the conductor o.s. and begins to close the doors
of the baggage car.
on Station Agent and conductors. The latter signals the
engineer. The train whistle sounds again o.s. and the shadow
of the moving train begins to pass across the Station Agent's
face.
As Rocklin comes along the platform carrying the valise in
one hand and balancing the saddle on his shoulder with the
other, a man behind him picks up the two mail sacks and exits
from scene. The station bums look at Rocklin curiously. His
expression giving no encouragement, they slink back out of
the sun and begin to settle down in their old places again.
At the ticket office, Rocklin pauses and looks around
uncertainly.
The stage is drawn up in front of the depot, over which is a
sign --
Rocklin, making his way along the walk, almost reaches the
depot when his attention is arrested by the sight of Dave,
the stage driver, who has just rounded in front of the lead
horses. He pauses close to one horse's head. Rocklin sees
Dave take a bottle from his person, uncork it as he glances
around, and raise it to drink. The bottle is almost to Dave's
lips when the horse shies, swinging its head. The bottle is
knocked from the old fellow's hands and smashes on the ground.
Now Rocklin witnesses a scene of intense fury, which he finds
amusing despite its seriousness. Old Dave rants and snorts --
beats his thighs, his heads, flings his arms wildly and
exhibits his utter disgust generally.
He stops talking abruptly because his hand has, quite by
chance, felt the spare bottle he carries, which he has
forgotten in his anger. A most satisfying smile lights his
bewhiskered face as he brings the bottle into view. He uncorks
it, and stepping a few paces from the horse, raises the
bottle.
who has been watching Dave's performance. He smiles his
amusement and now proceeds toward the stage office.
PAN SHOT. Rocklin enters and moves over to the counter, behind
which is the stage agent, a mild-looking man with pebble-
lens glasses. During the scene, the character who picked up
the mail sacks from the platform, comes in, dumps the sacks
on the counter and leaves.
Rocklin puts his saddle on the counter, and taking out a wad
of bills, drops them on the counter. The Stage Agent counts
out the fare.
The Stage Agent turns to make out the ticket. Rocklin takes
some tobacco and paper from his vest pocket as he glances
outside.
He shakes his head and hands Rocklin the ticket, and moves
over to the door with one of the mail sacks in his hand.
The Stage Agent, carrying a mail sack, and Rocklin come from
the stage depot and reach the stage as Dave is in the act of
climbing up to the driver's seat.
Dave looks over his shoulder at the Agent and steps to the
ground, as Rocklin climbs up to the driver's seat.
Dave glares at Rocklin climbing up to the seat, and he is
about to order him down when Rocklin, now seated, looks down
at him and asks rather wistfully --
Dave does mind, but his better judgment tells him to step
carefully in his attitude toward this stranger, who does
things first, then asks permission. His only answer to Rocklin
is a characteristic grimace which is eloquent enough. And
now Dave turns on the Agent, who becomes the target of his
pent-up wrath.
Dave stalks around the rear of the coach. The Agent meantime
stretches himself up toward Rocklin.
Dave has climbed to his seat, and now the coach lurches away,
leaving the Agent shaking his head dubiously.
From the porch of the hotel. We see the stage approaching as
the hotel handyman brings a trunk and a couple of bags from
the hotel to the street. The coach pulls up and stops.
Before the handyman can answer, Dave's attention is taken by
someone calling his name from across the street. Meantime,
an Indian squaw wobbles from the hotel with bow and arrow,
etc. Rocklin buys bow and arrow.
Dave goes to the rear of the coach.
Miss Martin steps out onto the porch followed by Clara and a
gentleman, presumably the hotel manager or clerk. The women
are obviously Easterners and are attired in the good taste
of the period. Miss Martin is a domineering woman, approaching
middle age. Her niece, Clara, is a well-bred, attractive
girl of twenty-one and completely under the influence of the
older woman.
Miss Martin stops short and looks o.s.
having a time lifting the trunk up into the boot. Miss Martin
and the others come into the scene.
Dave pauses to see who is talking.
on Clara. She is looking rather timidly up at Rocklin.
on Rocklin. He is grinning appreciatively at old Dave. Now
he notices Clara and regards her soberly a moment.
Dave has heaved the trunk in place and is securing it.
Miss Martin, about to enter the coach, notices Clara staring
up at Rocklin.
Clara snaps her attention from Rocklin to her aunt. The Clerk
steps to the side of the coach and opens the door. He assists
Clara inside -- and now Miss Martin.
Miss Martin and Clara. Miss Martin is just sitting. She looks
coldly at Clara.
Dave, Rocklin and Clerk. Dave is at the moment climbing to
his seat on the other side of the coach. The Clerk swings
the door closed and looks up to Rocklin and speaks more or
less confidentially.
He is looking down at the Clerk and answers quite casually,
but loud enough to be heard by the women.
THROUGH window of door -- Miss Martin and Clara. The women
have obviously overheard Rocklin's remark. Miss Martin smiles
vindictively at Clara, who flushes.
CAMERA PULLS BACK to include the Clerk, who moves to the
coach door.
On Dave and Rocklin.
He takes up the reins and shouts the team away.
EXTREME LONG SHOT -- with the stage hardly more than a black
dot below, its curl of rising dust in the midst of the whole
broad expanse. As the coach disappears from shot, the two
mounted men appear riding at an easy pace and continue in
the same direction as the coach.
MED. CLOSE SHOT -- Dave and Rocklin, the latter staring
straight ahead. As they roll with the roll of the coach,
Dave steals a look at his companion.
Rocklin ignores Dave's question and continues staring ahead.
Dave glances down toward the women.
He breaks off and chuckles again.
Dave doesn't reply, but lifting the pint of whiskey, jerks
out the cork with one movement of his thumbnail.
Rocklin drinks and gives the bottle back to Dave, who all
but empties it in one pull.
Rocklin makes no reply. Dave offers the bottle again.
He empties the bottle and shies it away. At the same time,
the coach hits a particularly bad patch of road and there is
muffled exclamation from inside the coach. Dave leans over
and looks down o.s.
MED. CLOSE SHOT -- Clara and Miss Martin. The former is
showing the effects of the rough ride, but the old lady is
hanging on grimly.
Dave straightens up, grinning.
He whips up the team, at the same time weaving a little
unsteadily in his seat.
The coach hits a particularly bad bit of road and there is
an exclamation from inside. Dave grins and urges the team on
cheerfully.
FULL SHOT -- as Dave pulls up the stage at the top of a long
downgrade and looks out appreciatively at the view. From
this crest of the rim, a vast expanse of country is visible.
stage. Miss Martin thrusts her head out of the window.
Dave brightens visibly at this challenge.
His whip cracks like a rifle shot and the startled horses
literally jerk the heavy stage over the rim and down the
grade.
grade, with the stagecoach bounding and reeling down the
narrow road and around the sharp bends.
Dave and Rocklin on stage as it thunders downhill. Dave is
leaning out and listening hopefully for the outcries from
within. None come. Rocklin is hanging on with both hands and
mildly amused.
The two women are really being scrambled.
CLOSE TWO SHOT -- Dave and Rocklin. Rocklin is as calm as if
he were walking. Dave is more and more pleased with himself.
He again leans out to listen.
grade, with coach approaching in b.g. In f.g. the road narrows
and makes a sharp turn at the very edge of a precipice. There
is no possible way of getting the coach safely around this
turn except at a walk.
road, from point of view of driver's seat, establishing the
same menace ahead.
Dave and Rocklin, as Rocklin glances out of the corner of
his eyes as if wondering whether or not Dave is too drunk to
perceive the disaster. He makes no move, however, to advise
or interfere.
road; at danger corner, as stage comes in. At the very last
second, Dave pulls in the horses and negotiates the turn in
safety.
stage. Dave grins at Rocklin, then listens for the outcry he
expects from the women within. The old lady's head bobs out
of the window.
Old Dave's mouth drops open, and as Rocklin begins to grin
at his discomfiture.
FULL SHOT of lonely adobe which serves as a combination
roadhouse, stage station and bar. As the coach rolls into
f.g., a little Mexican boy (Pablo) runs out to change the
horses.
He glances pointedly at Dave who is climbing down unsteadily
and Pablo bursts out laughing.
on door of coach. As Dave comes into shot, Miss Martin's
head pops out of the window.
He turns and lurches toward the roadhouse.
FULL SHOT from doorway. It is a large barn-like room on one
side of which is a bar. On the other side is a fireplace and
a partition behind which is a rough dining table and benches.
Standing at the bar drinking with his back to the door is a
wizened little man, dressed in an odd assortment of ragged
garments of unrecognizable origin. On the counter is a
travelling prospector's pack, to which is strapped an
assortment of prospector's equipment, including a pick and
shovel. As Dave enters, the man (Zeke) turns around and
reveals a face even hairier than Dave's.
Zeke and Dave as they beat one another on the back.
Rocklin has entered and moved to the fire. Miss Martin and
Clara enter and stand in the doorway watching the scene at
the bar. A pale-faced, dyspeptic-looking man of about 45
(Stan) comes from the kitchen and approaches them
ingratiatingly.
bar. Dave has just fitted a cylindrical record of "She Was
Only a Bird in a Gilded Cage" to an old-type phonograph.
They both yell with laughter and slap one another on the
back.
from fireplace. Rocklin is standing in f.g. looking down at
the fire and making the inevitable cigarette from his pocket
dip. Seated at the table are Clara and Miss Martin. From
o.s. comes the sound of Zeke and Dave singing to the
phonograph record. Miss Martin glares indignantly in the
direction of the bar, obviously about to make a protest. At
this moment Stan comes from the kitchen with a large dish in
his hand which he dumps on the table.
Miss Martin, sitting forward eagerly, suddenly sees the dish
of meat and freezes.
dish of meat. It is swimming in greasy brown gravy.
Miss Martin as she shudders dyspeptically and closes her
eyes.
bar, as Stan comes from the table to Dave and Zeke.
table. Clara has filled a plate with food, which she offers
to her aunt.
Clara hesitates for a second, then looks across to Rocklin.
He comes to table and begins to help himself. There is a
loud burst of laughter from the bar.
Clara looks apologetically at Rocklin, then away again
nervously. Suddenly, she sees something o.s. and drops her
knife and fork with a little start.
window. A thin, unpleasant-looking face is seen through the
glass. The windowpane is defective and so distorts the lower
part of the face into a hideous smile. It is the younger of
the two men who were watching the coach outside the hotel.
on kitchen door as Stan comes through with a dish of potatoes.
A man's voice is heard o.s. and he pulls up abruptly.
CAMERA HAS PANNED TO include the side door next to the window
and almost opposite to the dining table. The owner of the
face at the window (Bob Clews) is now standing in the doorway.
Behind him is the man with the sheriff's badge on his dirty
vest (Jackson). As they come forward toward Stan, the latter
shows obvious signs of nervousness.
Jackson, as though noticing the women for the first time,
raises his hat.
Miss Martin gives Clews an icy stare and snaps her eyes to
Jackson.
Rocklin speaks from where he leans against the wall, casually
smoking.
There's a pause in which all have turned their attention to
Rocklin.
Jackson and Clews exchange a quick glance.
Jackson follows, looking at the women.
Jackson follows Stan into the kitchen. Clews moves to the
fire and lunges there picking his teeth and eyeing Clara,
who stirs uneasily under the man's gaze.
as Rocklin comes out of the thoughtful mood in which he has
been plunged by the information about Red Caldwell and notes
the by-play between Clews and Clara. He frowns and makes a
movement as if about to rise. At the same time, Dave and
Zeke, whose voices have been heard throughout In the b.g.,
stagger into the shot.
Zeke takes it and staggers into the b.g. near Bob Clews.
Zeke opens his mouth to speak, and slowly folds up, sliding
down the wall to the floor.
as Clews comes from the fireplace and joins the group.
Dave has gone to Zeke's aid and now peers at Clews closely,
recognizing him for the first time.
Stan and Jackson come from the kitchen. Dave is again picking
up Zeke, but seeing Stan, lets Zeke drop.
Jackson addresses everyone present with an indulgent Smile.
Zeke, on the floor, takes up Dave's belligerent mood for a
flash.
Jackson goes to Dave.
Clews moves in to Jackson and Dave, and now both men urge
Dave toward the door.
They exit. Rocklin stands frowning a second, then turns toward
the table where Stan is making a show of clearing dishes,
etc.
Rocklin's lips curl in a wise smile.
Zeke is discovered on all fours crawling around on the floor
near the table where the women sit. He seems to be looking
for something.
Zeke turns his hairy face up toward Miss Martin.
The door leading from the barn opens and Jackson enters
followed by Clews a few steps behind.
Rocklin has been listening intently.
of the group, with Clews looking significantly at Jackson,
who is obviously checkmated by Rocklin's remark.
He turns abruptly and walks out the front door to the coach.
Jackson stares after him a moment, uncertain. Now he turns
to the women.
Miss Martin hesitates.
MED. SHOT -- coach as Rocklin moves toward it from the house.
A crudely made arrow shoots in and hits Rocklin lightly. A
warning hiss is heard o.s. and he turns quickly in the
direction of the sound.
MED. SHOT -- door of stable. The little Mexican who attended
the horses is peering out from the stable.
The kid disappears inside the stable. Rocklin comes into
shot from the direction of the coach and enters the stable.
Rocklin comes through the door and moves toward the boy, who
is standing looking downward into some hay.
CAMERA PANS DOWN to show Dave unconscious, with a nasty cut
in his scalp. Rocklin kneels into the shot. Over the scene
comes the sound of retreating hoofbeats.
LONG SHOT -- from Rocklin's ANGLE in the stable, of Jackson
and Bob Clews riding away.
He kneels again, picks Dave up, and prepares to carry him
out.
LONG SHOT of stagecoach traveling.
Rocklin on the driver's seat, handling the reins expertly.
PANNING SHOT -- with Miss Martin and Clara now seated next
to one another. Clara is half asleep with her head against
the side of the coach. Miss Martin is sitting bolt upright
but her eyes are closed and her head nods. CAMERA PANS to
include the other side of the coach where Dave is sprawled
in the seat, his head on a cushion, his mouth open, sound
asleep. Suddenly he snores violently, and Miss Martin wakes
with a start and glares at him angrily.
PANNING SHOT on sign on window which reads:
CAMERA PANS to show the coach pulled up outside, with Rocklin
lifting his saddle from the top of the coach, whilst a
stableman holds up Dave.
group, to include the window of the coach. Miss Martin's
head appears.
The two move out of shot across the road, followed by the
indignant gaze of Miss Martin.
PANNING SHOT -- opening on the sign over the door, which
reads:
CAMERA PANS to show Rocklin and Dave coming along the
boardwalk in front of the saloon. CAMERA PANS them to the
swing-doors, which Rocklin pushes open, passing through into
the saloon.
PANNING SHOT -- SHOOTING FROM BEHIND the bar toward the swing-
doors as Dave and Rocklin enter. The bartender (Cap), a lean,
tallish man of about 50, studies them as they enter, then
turns and calls across the room.
CAMERA PANS to show a group of poker players seated around a
table. This consists of a well-dressed, powerful-looking man
of about 45 (Judge Garvey), with a smooth face and an
impressive manner; a flashily-dressed young man with a weak
face (Clint Harolday); a tough-looking cowboy of about 35
(Ab Jenkins); a pleasant-faced storekeeper of about 50 (Pap
Fossler); and a little man with a weather-beaten face and
intensely blue eyes (Doc Riding). Watching the game are Sam
Haynes and Shorty Davis, the former a townsman and the latter
a cowboy. As they all look toward the door, Cap's voice
continues.
Doc Riding looks quickly toward the door, taking in the
situation.
Rocklin and Dave come to the bar. At the same time, Doc Riding
comes into shot from the poker table.
The bartender looks dubious.
As Rocklin and Doc Riding begin to lead Dave toward the
Stairs.
TRUCKING SHOT -- starting on big head of Dave, as he lies in
bed, with his eyes closed. His head is swathed in a clean
bandage. He stirs and gives a little chuckle.
CAMERA PULLS BACK to show Doc Riding at the bed and Rocklin
beyond, standing in the connecting doorway between two
bedrooms. The latter has a face towel in his hands and has
evidently been washing up. As Dave settles down comfortably
in the bed, Doc Riding closes his bag, nods to Rocklin and
moves toward the second bedroom.
MED. CLOSE SHOT -- as Doc Riding comes through the doorway
from Dave's room.
Rocklin closes door behind him.
He moves across the room, followed by Rocklin, who throws
the towel down on the bed as he passes. For a second, he
hesitates as if about to pick up the gun-belt which is lying
on the bed. Then, deciding to leave it, he follows the doctor
through the door.
MED. CLOSE SHOT -- at bar, with Cap Setting up glasses for
Doc Riding and Rocklin. He nods to indicate the bedroom
upstairs.
Cap reverts to Rocklin, still casually, but with an undertone
of friendly warning.
They down the drinks. There is a burst of excited comment
from o.s. and they all look around toward the poker table.
Poker table from bar. The flashily-dressed youngster is raking
in the stakes triumphantly.
Group at bar.
Poker table and including bar. Sammy Haynes has risen and is
pushing back his chair.
Judge Garvey in foreground has been watching Rocklin, as if
trying to sum him up. He now leans forward with an
ingratiating smile.
Rocklin smiles and begins to shake his head.
Rocklin turns very slowly and stares at Clint. The others
watch curiously. Without taking his eyes off Clint, he comes
forward slowly and stands looking down at him. Then,
unbuttoning the flap of his pocket, he takes out the wad of
bills and drops it on the table, at the same time sinking
into the chair vacated by Sammy. The tension amongst the
onlookers relaxes and Clint grins at Garvey and winks
significantly.
MED. SHOT -- poker table, including Cap, who is watching.
Pap Fossler is dealing. There is an atmosphere of tension
around the table, and it is obvious that Clint has been
losing. As he picks up his cards, he is unable to restrain a
smile of triumph. Rocklin makes a bet. Pap Fossler and the
man next to him fold immediately.
This is more than Rocklin has in front of him.
He stares challengingly at Rocklin. Rocklin takes out a
wallet, from which he removes a bill and sees the raise.
He reaches for it almost before it is dealt and as a result
the card, a Queen, falls face up. Clint looks at it gleefully,
snatches it up and puts it in his hand. Rocklin watches him
impassively.
Rocklin glances inquiringly at the other players. All are
dead-panned, unwilling to interfere. Rocklin looks toward
Cap, who stands near him.
He shoves all the money in front of him into the pot.
Clint excitedly starts to rake in the pot.
He shoves in the money in front of him, which is more than
Clint's and in addition takes from his wallet more bills.
Clint, very excited, empties his pockets, which is not enough.
Rocklin starts raking in the pot. Clint, almost hysterical,
jumps up, draws his gun and thrusts it almost into Rocklin's
face. The other players roll away from the line of fire.
Rocklin, his hands outspread, slowly straightens up, rises
and backs away. At the foot of the stairs, he turns
deliberately and walks upstairs. When he disappears from
view --
Clint breaks the tension, looking from one to the other.
There is a cold silence.
Cap turns and resumes his trek to the bar. Suddenly he stops
before reaching it and is looking up, o.s.
Rocklin is standing there grimly surveying the situation. As
he starts down the stairs...
They are staring o.s. Clint is very uneasy. And now Rocklin
moves slowly into the scene.
Clint again looks around for approval, but gets no response.
Rocklin comes slowly forward, picks up the money from the
table and turns back to the stairs. As he reaches the foot
of the stairs, he turns and looks straight at Garvey with a
peculiar expression.
TRUCKING SHOT -- on a small cracked mirror in which can be
seen the reflection of a man shaving. A voice is heard
singing, atrociously off key.
CAMERA PULLS BACK to show that the owner of tie voice is
Rocklin, who has almost finished shaving. As he scrapes his
chin and whistles, peering at himself in the little cracked
mirror, he hears the sound of the door opening and turns,
then ducks quickly as a boot flies past him, just missing
the mirror. There is the sound of the door slamming and
Rocklin grins. He picks up the boot and goes to the door
leading to Dave's room.
As Rocklin enters, Dave is discovered almost dressed sitting
on the bed. Rocklin, glad to see him, smiles and tosses the
boot to him.
He hurries out the hall door. Rocklin, amused at the old
coot, starts back into his room.
Rocklin is just coming through the door and sees something
o.s., stops and freezes.
CAMERA PULLS BACK to include Bob Clews leaning against the
open ball door leading into Rocklin's room. He smiles as
Rocklin sees him.
Clews hesitates for a second as if anxious to wake sure he
is coming, then, turning, he disappears into the hall. Rocklin
wipes the last of the lather off his chin, buckles on his
gun-belt and picking up his hat goes out, closing the door.
MED. SHOT -- Dave, at the bar, grabbing a bottle, pours
himself a drink which he sinks in one draught. He shudders
and repeats the dose. During this, an excited murmur of voices
has been heard o.s. Dave turns and looks toward the far side
of the saloon and suddenly gapes.
with Dave in f.g., and SHOOTING TOWARD the street. A group
of men, including Cap, the bartender, is gathered round the
window looking out into the street. Dave staggers across to
them and begins to push his way to the window.
group at window as Dave pushes them aside to get a view of
what is happening outside.
PANNING SHOT -- including Arly and Juan mounted in front of
the stagecoach office, which is situated diagonally across
the street from the Sun-Up.
CAMERA HOLDS ON one group standing in front of Pap Fossler's
store, opposite the Sun-Up.
ON the window. The men inside, including Dave and Cap, are
pressed against the glass.
CAMERA MOVES BACK and PANS TO the alleyway at the side of
the saloon. Rocklin is coming toward the street.
Rocklin, as he comes out of the shadow of the alleyway and
stands blinking in the full sunlight. Sensing something
unusual, he looks quickly around.
from Rocklin's ANGLE. CAMERA PANS OVER the groups in the
street, STOPPING ON one which includes Bob Clews. As Clews
sees Rocklin, he nudges a bystander and looks toward the
stagecoach office with a grin.
CAMERA PANS to include Arly and Juan.
Rocklin as he takes in the situation. With a grim look, he
begins to move along the sidewalk, CAMERA TRUCKING WITH him.
Suddenly, there is the clatter of a horse's hooves and Arly
gallops into shot, forcing the mare up onto the sidewalk and
barring Rocklin's progress.
of group at window of Sun-Up Saloon.
of group including Bob Clews, as Clint Harolday rides in and
stares o.s.
Rocklin, as he looks coldly from Arly to the run and back
again. Calmly taking the reins, he forces the mare's head up
and moves on. Furiously, Arly spurs the mare alongside, CAMERA
TRUCKING WITH them.
Arly and Rocklin. Rocklin continues along the sidewalk.
Arly. She raises her gun.
A shot comes from o.s. and strikes the building close to
him. He stiffens but keeps on walking. Another shot comes
even closer this time. He keeps walking.
As he puts out his hand to push open the door,
Rocklin's hand on the door as four shots in quick succession
spatter a line down the door close to his hand.
TRUCKING SHOT -- Rocklin, as he continues his forward movement
through the swing-doors. CAMERA PULLS BACK in front of him
into the saloon until it reaches the bar. Cap moves from
window with crowd and goes behind bar.
CLOSE SHOT -- Arley with the smoking gun still in her hand.
She stares wildly after Rocklin for a second, then wheels
her horse violently toward the group which includes Cling
Harolday and Bob Clews.
group surrounding Clews and Clint Harolday. The clatter of
hoofs is heard and Arly gallops furiously into shot.
Before Clint can reply, she wheels the mare and gallops out
of shot.
MED. SHOT -- as the customers, with Dave in f.g., mill around
Rocklin.
He sinks the whiskey and begins to pour himself another. At
the same time, the swing-doors open and Bob Clews comes
through. AS Rocklin raises the glass to his lips, Bob Clews
hits him on the back, causing him to spill the whisky.
There is a moment's pause. Then with a slow, grim smile of
satisfaction, Rocklin turns and knocks Bob Clews off his
feet.
with Bob Clews on the floor, tugging at his gun. As it comes
free of the holster, Rocklin brings his heel down on Clews'
wrist, grinding on it with his whole weights. Then, kicking
the gun out of reach, Rocklin steps back. Bob Clews sits up,
clutching his wrist and weaving back and forth.
to include the bystanders. They look at Bob Clews without
sympathy. He gets to his feet and stumbles back, collapsing
in a chair.
at bar, Dave has taken the bottle from Cap and is refilling
Rocklin's and his own glass ecstatically.
He sinks both drinks quickly and is about to refill them
when Cap takes the bottle from him.
As he moves toward the door.
Clint Harolday is seen at the window peering furtively toward
the Sun-Up Saloon. He suddenly notices something o.s. which
prompts him to say something which we of course cannot hear.
Now Garvey appears at the window.
Rocklin, FROM Garvey's ANGLE as he leaves the Sun-Up and
starts toward the Judge's office.
Garvey and Clint, at the window. From their expressions it
is apparent that anxious words are passing between them, and
now Clint suddenly drops from sight.
ON Arly and Juan, mounted. They see Rocklin going into
Garvey's place.
MED. SHOT -- TOWARD door, with Garvey at desk in f.g. The
door opens and Rocklin enters.
Rocklin looks him over for a second, then comes quietly to
the desk.
He takes out a letter and hands it to Garvey. The latter
takes it slowly, handling it as if it were dangerous. He
looks from the letter to Rocklin and back again. Then
reluctantly, he opens it and begins to read.
LETTER -- It reads:
Dear Mr. Rocklin:
Glad you have made up your mind to take the job. Enclosed
find train fare and $150 advance on wages.
Yours faithfully,
J. Caldwell
Rocklin and Garvey. The latter looks up from the letter
completely bewildered.
There is a little pause, with Garvey still bewildered.
He studies Rocklin a short moment, then sits back comfortably
and relieved.
There is a knock on the door. Garvey rises and speaks on his
way to the door.
Garvey opens the door, and Miss Martin stalks in followed by
Clare.
Miss Martin sits stiffly as she eyes Rocklin coldly.
They all turn and stare at her.
The sound of rapid steps approaching from outside is heard
and they all look toward the door.
on door, as it opens to admit Arly. Ignoring everyone in the
room except Garvey, she comes abruptly to the desk, with the
riding quirt dangling from her wrist.
For the first time, she appears to be conscious of the
presence of the other women.
Arly stares at her unbelievingly for a second.
She looks slowly from Clara to Rocklin, as if suspecting
collusion.
Rocklin, as he stares at Arly with an enigmatic expression.
Suddenly, he seems to make up his mind.
as Arly turns abruptly on her heel and exits the way she
came. Rocklin makes a little gesture to the ladies with his
hat and follows. As he goes, Juan, who has been leaning
against the doorpost, follows, closing the door behind him.
She turns abruptly and drops onto the couch by the window.
CAMERA PANS TO HOLD A CLOSE TWO SHOT of Garvey and Miss
Martin.
Garvey leans back in his chair and smiles.
Miss Martin throws him a quick look, which he returns
steadily.
Arly and Rocklin walking along the street, not far from
Harolday's office. Rocklin glances back toward Julio, who is
following a few paces behind them. He rides his horse and is
leading Arly's.
Rocklin nods, looks back again at Julio, then back to Arly
as they go out of shot.
PAINING SHOT -- as Arly comes to from the street, followed
by Julio and Rocklin.
CAMERA PANS her over to a door marked "PRIVATE," which she
opens without knocking.
MED. SHOT as Arly comes through from the outer office toward
Harolday, who is seated at desk in f.g. At Arly's abrupt
entrance, he looks up, startled.
There is a little pause. Harolday's face is completely dead
pan. He looks out of the window for a second, then back at
Arly.
Arly goes to the door and opens it.
Rocklin comes in and Arly exits without a word, closing the
door behind her.
as Rocklin comes from the doorway into f.g. of shot, facing
Harolday, who is seated on the far side of the desk.
A sudden clatter of feet is heard and all eyes turn toward
the door.
as Dave, followed by Arly and Juan, bursts in. His eyes go
around the room quickly until he finds Rocklin.
They all look quickly toward the window.
LONG SHOT -- from stagecoach office window. The center of
the street is clear and men's heads are peering from doorways.
MED. SHOT -- group at window, looking into street.
Dave turns and looks curiously at Rocklin, who frowns
impatiently.
The place is quite full and the atmosphere is one of
expectancy despite the outward casualness of the patrons. A
group lolls near the window, looking toward the stage office.
At the door a couple of customers peer out over the swinging
doors. The bar supports other customers engaged in various
private conversations but all are mindful of the presence of
George Clews who, with his brother, Bob, stands at the bar's
center, morosely toying with a glass of whisky in front of
him. He is quite conscious of the subtle glances of the
others, but regards them all with disdain. He downs his drink,
and speaks his thought to Bob.
Suddenly Old Dave appears in a high state of excitement, and
halts with the swinging doors half open.
George Clews turns.
George Clews frowns. His eye catches sight of a king-size
glass of beer being slid across the bar to Shorty Davis,
standing alongside him. That quick, Clews beats Shorty to
the glass and hurls it at Dave, who ducks out. Cap,
anticipating trouble, brings a sawed-off shotgun up from
under the bar and now watches Clews and Shorty.
Before Shorty can reply, Clews yanks his hat down over the
little fellow's eyes, and gives him a backward shove that
sends him sprawling into a corner where we leave him
struggling to get his hat off. The crowd resents this, but
doesn't dare do anything, except Cap, who holds his shotgun
in sight.
George and Bob Clews are now a few steps from the bar. They
have turned as Cap spoke and are looking at the shotgun.
George turns and starts for the doors as Bob comes back to
the bar to settle up.
As George Clews steps outside, a mangy mongrel dog, basking
close by, evidently recognizes him and tails it away, leaving
George blinking at him.
Rocklin -- FROM George's ANGLE. He is walking slowly forward
down the middle of the street.
George, looking baffled by the steady approach.
He steps down from the sidewalk into the street and then
stands still again.
Rocklin -- CAMERA MOVING WITH him as he comes slowly and
steadily forward.
George. His hands are on his guns, but drunk or not, he has
too much sense to draw too soon.
MED. SHOT -- Harolday watching from behind the window of his
office. Behind Harolday are Julio and Arly. The latter makes
a step as if about to move to the door, but Julio restrains
her.
MED. CLOSE SHOT -- as Garvey, Miss Martin and Clara watch
the scene below -- Garvey and Miss Martin excitedly and Clara
in great distress.
CLOSER SHOT -- men in hotel doorway, taut with excitement.
Rocklin -- SHOOTING PAST George, whose hands are on his gun
butts. Rocklin's thumbs are hooked in his belt as he continues
slowly forward, his eyes fixed on George's.
George, as he stands bewildered and open- mouthed. Rocklin
enters scene, suddenly whips out his gun and brings it
crashing down alongside George's head. The barrel strikes
though the crown of his hat and he goes down like a pole-
axed steer.
MED. CLOSE SHOT -- group at window. Arly gives an involuntary
exclamation of pleasure, which she instantly checks, then
she moves abruptly out of shot, followed by Juan. Harolday
continues to stare frowningly out of the window.
MED. CLOSE SHOT -- group at window, with Garvey obviously
disapponted, Miss Martin bridling and Clara showing obvious
relief.
MED. SHOT -- Rocklin and crowd as they swirl around him
offering congratulations. Dave pushes his way through the
crowd and thumps Rocklin on the back in wild enthusiasm. At
the same time, the sound of a horse cantering is heard, and
Jackson comes into shot.
He turns contemptuously and begins to move back towards the
stage office completely ignoring Jackson, who rides alongside
blusteringly.
The crowd which has been following now begins to razz him
openly. He turns and glares, but without effect. He gives a
final shout to Rocklin.
Pulling his horse around, he sets off in a lope up the street.
as Miss Martin comes along the street, determinedly, followed
by Clara, until she is face to face with Rocklin outside the
stage office where Arly and Juan are mounted ready to move
off.
Clara pulls her sleeve imploringly.
She takes Clara by the arm and sweeps past them towards the
hotel. Rocklin looks after them with a grim expression and
then up at Arly, who has been listening intently. She returns
his look steadily for a second. Then, with a mocking smile,
she wheels the mare and canters out of shot, followed by
Juan. He looks after her for a second; then with the same
grim look, enters Harolday's office.
Harolday is standing at the window, looking toward the door,
having seen Rocklin approaching. The door opens and Rocklin
enters and resumes his conversation as though it were hardly
interrupted.
Rocklin realizes that maybe Harolday is trying to throw a
curve -- trying to get him to talk.
On Dave and Pap Fossler engaged in conversation in front of
Pap's store. In the b.g. -- across the street, we carry the
entrance to the Sun-Up Saloon.
During Dave's speech Rocklin has come from the Sun-up carrying
his valise. He pauses a moment, looking around. Dave sees
him.
He hurries across the street toward Rocklin.
On Rocklin just stepping off the curb. Dave comes in to him.
They start across the street, slowly toward the stage office.
Rocklin gives Dave a quizzical look, which Dave mistakes for
weakening.
Dave and Rocklin have reached middle of the street. Pap
Fossler's voice comes again from o.s.
Dave reacts with a squint in Pap's direction. He runs out
toward Pap, but would rather stay with Rocklin. THE CAMERA
FOLLOWS Rocklin ACROSS the street To the stage office, where
see Arly and Tala sitting on their horses apparently waiting
for Rocklin. A third horse is standing by with Rocklin's
saddle on it.
Rocklin, upon reaching the front of the stage office, pauses
a moment, to look over the horse carrying his saddle --
glances up to Arly.
He goes into the stage of office, as we
LONG SHOT -- as Rocklin, Arly and Juan canter along a dirt
road over open country with the mountain ranges in the
distance.
CAMERA PANS to show a buggy on the road ahead, approaching a
wooded dell where the road divides.
of the buggy, showing Miss Martin riding in front, beside
Shorty Davis, who is driving, and Clara with her back to the
driver, facing the oncoming trio. Miss Martin hears the sound
of the approaching horses, and looks over her shoulder.
Arly, Juan and Rocklin, with Miss Martin in F.g. The latter
scowls and looks quickly to her front as the riders draw
level with the buggy, Rocklin coining to the right, alongside
Clara.
with Miss Martin in f.g. and SHOOTING OVER her shoulder to
include Clara and Rocklin.
Rocklin looks quickly in the same direction.
from Rocklin's ANGLE, with Arly and Juan at the fork in the
road. They are looking back towards the buggy which has taken
the lower road to the right of the copse.
with Arly and Juan in f.g. and the buggy in the distance.
Rocklin raises his hat to the women in the buggy and canters
back to Arly, who has been watching with a peculiar
expression.
She looks at him angrily for a second as if about to say
something sarcastic. Then, repressing herself, she wheels
her horse and canters off along the side of the copse. Rocklin
throws an amused glance, at Juan, who has been watching with
an enigmatic expression. He returns Rocklin's look with a
stern, menacing frown. Then, with a gentle flick of the rein,
he urges his horse after Arly. Completely baffled, Rocklin
scratches his head for a second, then follows.
MED. SHOT -- as the three canter up the driveway to a smart-
looking ranch house. Arly dismounts and throws her reins to
Juan.
Before Rocklin can speak, she runs quickly up the steps of
the verandah and disappears into the house. Leading Arly's
Horse, Juan moves out of shot to the left of the ranch house
and Rocklin follows.
MED. SHOT -- as Juan comes into shot leading the mare,
followed by Rocklin. They both dismount and begin to off-
saddle.
There is a moment's pause. Then, what almost amounts to a
smile of relief, crosses Juan's face.
LONG SHOT -- as Rocklin and Juan ride out from the ranch
through the early morning mist and turn off in the direction
of the distant line of mountains.
LONG SHOT -- as the two leave the open country and enter the
mouth of a steep and narrow gorge at the foot of the mountain
range.
as Juan pulls up and dismounts, followed by Rocklin.
For a second Juan does not reply. Then, as he speaks, he
takes a tobacco pouch from his pocket. Rocklin, his mind on
other things, does not take particular notice of the pouch,
but we cannot help notice the pouch ornament -- a steer's
head of hammered silver.
Rocklin shakes his head. Juan, having spilled tobacco in a
paper, now puts away the pouch and rolls his own.
He turns abruptly and mounts the waiting horse; then looks
down from the saddle.
He rides quickly out of the shot.
MED. SHOT -- as Rocklin forces his horse up the last few
feet of the steep trail at the top of the canyon, and pulls
up at the top of the rise with a look of amazement.
A rich meadow stretches ahead with a stream running through
it, and a cabin at the far end. Steep escarpments surround
the lush meadow land, making an idyllic scene. As Rocklin
comes slowly into shot with the same look of startled
appreciation on his face and begins to move toward the cabin,
LONG SHOT -- of Juan, as he canters across open country toward
the ranch.
CAMERA PANS to include the road from Santa Inez along which
approaches a smallish freight wagon, pulled by two horses.
As the driver sees Juan and waves his whip, the Mexican
swerves from his course and canters toward the wagon.
wagon, which we now see is being driven by Dave. On the side
of the wagon is written: TRANSPORT & GENERAL FREIGHTAGE --
Pap Fossler and Sons. Juan canters into shot and pulls up
alongside the wagon.
Shelley, a Negro servant of the Harolday household, is
discovered sweeping the front porch. Behind him we see Clint
open the door -- peer furtively out -- then cross the porch
to its edge when he looks o.s. as though searching for
someone.
Shelley, meantime, has noticed Clint, but goes right on with
his sweeping. His only reaction is a disparaging glance over
his shoulder.
To emphasize his point, Shelley puckers his mouth in a
whistle.
Clint's face tightens as he anticipates what is in store for
him. Over the scene comes the gradually increasing sound of
a feminine voice, gayly humming the notes of a popular tune
of the period. Clint's strained features relax in a can-that-
be-Arly expression, while Shelley stops dead in the middle
of a sweep, and now both stare incredulously, o.s.
From their ANGLE we first see only the corner of the house,
while the owner of the voice approaches from the other side.
Now Arly comes into view, entirely oblivious of Clint and
Shelley watching her. She seems more attractive, in a feminine
way, this morning. It may be the skirt and blouse she is
wearing. Then again it may be the flower she is, even now,
adjusting in her hair. The presence of the two men suddenly
startles her. The song ends abruptly, while her hands fall
quickly away from the flower.
As Arly moves toward the porch, Shelley snaps back to life
and resumes sweeping -- but furiously. Clint regards the
girl in the vague manner of the puzzled gent he is.
Arly is coming toward Clint.
She steps close to Clint, and he slowly backs up a step, for
he does not know she came up to him merely to pick up her
jacket lying on the ground near the step.
Arly straightens up with the jacket in her hand, and the
corner of her mouth curls in a faint smile. She turns now
and starts along the walk, and takes only a few steps when
Clint comes to her side.
Arly pays no attention to Clint. She is looking o.s. and
stops walking.
Tala, on his horse, as seen by Arly. Over the scene comes
Arly's voice calling from a distance.
Tala reacts to the call by heading his horse at a slightly
different angle.
Arly is looking o.s. toward Tala. Clint is now eyeing his
sister up and down quite openly. She turns her head now and
catches Clint looking her over.
A gesture of his hand indicates the way Arly has gotten
herself up. That quick, Arly's hand goes to the flower in
her hair. And, that quick, she guiltily withdraws it.
Before he can explain, Tala pulls up in his horse and we
hear his voice over the scene.
Tala sitting astride his horse smiles down at the girl.
Arly is jolted by Tala's innocent remark, and she can't help
giving Clint a little side glance in the way of reaction.
Clint has not missed Tala's crack nor Arly's glance, and
when she gives it to him he says:
He tosses her an altogether knowing look now, and leaves,
going up the walk toward the house. Arly turns to Tala.
She glances over her shoulder toward Clint going up the walk.
And then, looking back to Tala, finds he hasn't moved, but
remains smiling down at her.
Arly looks away. Her eyes stare blankly into space as she
struggles with the mixed emotions of anger and disappointment.
Tala, aware of her plight, slowly dismounts and comes to the
girl's side.
Arly is quiet a moment.
entrance to ranch. Entering the driveway from the direction
of Santa Inez, comes Harolday, still looking the distinguished
citizen.
Julio exits.
still smarting under the disappointment about Rocklin, seems
lost in thought. After regarding her a moment Harolday speaks.
Arly turns her eyes on Harolday, who continues.
Arly's eyes burn as she tosses her head slightly.
He turns abruptly and walks off the verandah.
as Harolday comes from the verandah to his horse. Juan is
standing there with the briefcase which Harolday takes with
a yank, mounts his horse and rides out.
The CAMERA MOVES IN CLOSE on Arly, who stands in furious
silence watching Harolday ride away.
Old Dave is jogging along in his wagon. A rumble of thunder
echoes through the canyon. Dave reacts with a look toward
the sky.
of storm clouds gathering.
A night shot of the mountain road near Table-Top. It is a
wooded section of the plateau, and occasional flashes of
lightning illuminate the big trees skirting the road. Dave,
in his wagon, looms out of the b.g., and as he nears the
camera we hear him urging the team through the downpour. As
he passes and continues hurriedly on his way, we
CLOSE SHOT on a soiled and wrinkled envelope lying on a table.
It is addressed to:
The CAMERA PULLS BACK and Rocklin is revealed at the table,
looking down at the letter. His hat is tipped back on his
head, and his sleeves are rolled up. He is mixing dough in a
bowl sitting on the table near the letter, and his hands are
all gooey. Dave is discovered in front of the fireplace where
his outer shirt and socks are drying. It is dark outside,
but the storm has abated. Rocklin goes to a shelf near the
fireplace to get a pan.
Dave watches Rocklin at the table shaping the dough for
biscuits and putting it in the pan.
Rocklin cannot help smiling a bit at the way Dave includes
himself in.
Dave screws up his face in utter disgust and turns his
attention to his drying clothes.
Rocklin, meanwhile, takes a flour sack from the table, wipes
the dough from his hands and picks up the letter. He goes
over to the fireplace, opening the letter the while, and
sits on the bench. Dave, seeing this, edges discreetly around
in back of Rocklin in order to see over his shoulder.
The letter open, Rocklin takes out a roll of bills along
with the folded message. He lays the envelope on the bench.
Rocklin places the money in his shirt pocket for the moment,
and opens the folded message.
LETTER. It begins with the usual Dear Mr. Rocklin.
Rocklin's voice is heard over the insert as he reads from
here.
Rocklin glares up to Dave.
The letter finished, Rocklin regards it a moment, then slowly
returns it to the envelope as he gazes thoughtfully into the
fire.
Dave meantime straightens up -- scratches his shaggy top,
and turns his attention once more to his drying clothes.
Rocklin continues looking into the fire as he lays the letter
back on the bench and takes out tobacco to roll a cigarette.
Dave sits alongside Rocklin and begins putting on his socks.
Rocklin has been mulling things over.
Rocklin goes to the table and resumes molding biscuits.
Dave has his boots on and is putting on his outer shirt.
Dave grimaces his confidence.
In the pause Rocklin remains silent.
Rocklin moves away to a large earthen jug holding water as
Dave talks.
Dave sits down on a box sitting against the wall, directly
under the large earthen jug of water.
A dark, mysterious figure on a horse raises his rifle --
A shot splinters the windowpane and shatters the earthen jug
on the shelf directly above Dave's head. The contents pour
down on Dave and he topples over. Rocklin meanwhile has wiped
the lantern off the table and ducked. They are both on the
floor in the faint glow coming from the fireplace.
Rocklin takes off his hat and puts his finger through two
holes drilled by the bullet.
Rocklin puts the hat aside -- crawls over to his gun belt --
straps it on.
He opens the door cautiously. Then sneaks out, followed by
Dave.
Rocklin and Dave stand close to the cabin, just clear of the
door, tensely scanning the surrounding darkness.
Water can be heard dripping from the cabin roof, and an owl
hoots in a near-by tree.
The sound of neighing horses comes from the direction of the
corral. Both men re-act.
Almost immediately the neighing is repeated, but this time
from another direction entirely -- and from a distance.
He moves to the corner of the cabin, followed by Dave.
and now it starts away, galloping through the deep grass at
the edge of the clearing. Only the lower part of the animal
is seen, along with the legs of the rider.
And they can barely make out their quarry riding hell-bent
toward the deep blackness of the trees.
Rocklin fires and runs out into the moonlight in the clearing --
Dave close behind.
Rocklin halts -- fires again -- and again. Dave fires.
The mysterious rider is now swallowed by the night.
Dave starts after him again. Looking back, he sees Rocklin
has not moved.
He starts through the wet grass alone. Rocklin turns back
toward the cabin.
He has reached the edge of the clearing where a slight
embankment leads to the level of the trees. He is just
starting up to higher ground when his eyes catch something
on the embankment, shining in the moonlight. It proves to be
a tobacco pouch bearing a steer's head of hammered sliver.
It is dry, so has evidently just been dropped. Dave pockets
it, and proceeds warily along the mystery rider's trail.
He looks back in Dave's direction, and then looking toward
the cabin, suddenly stops and tenses.
and through it Rocklin can plainly see an indistinct form
moving in the faint glow of the dying fire.
Rocklin has reached the entrance unheard, and silently watches
the strange figure, its back to him, now headed for the
fireplace with his saddlebag, taken from the bunk. He sees
the intruder start emptying his saddlebag on the bench in
the light of the fire. He sees him suddenly stop and pick up
something hidden from his view.
At that instant, Rocklin slams the door shut.
The intruder whirls around.
It is Arly -- tense -- and now defiant.
The two regard each other like vicious animals in the same
cage. Arly's heart is pounding, but you would never know it.
And now Rocklin, his gun away, starts closing in, slowly --
but Arly holds her ground -- her eyes never leaving his.
When Rocklin reaches Arly, he takes her one hand from behind
her back, and slowly forcing it up sees what is obviously
Clara's letter in her tightly clenched fist. He tries to
open her hand, and Arly, knowing she lacks the strength to
prevent it, suddenly whips out a knife with her free hand.
But that quick, Rocklin grabs the knife hand, and without
any apparent effort, wrenches it free of her grasp and tosses
it across the room, where it lands on the bunk. Arly relaxes
her grip on the letter meanwhile, and Rocklin gets it, and
tears it very deliberately, letting the pieces fall at her
feet.
He turns his back on her now, going over to his hat on the
floor.
Arly is furious in her helplessness and humiliation. And
Rocklin's smug manner isn't helping any. He picks up his hat
and, glancing at Arly, puts his finger once more through the
bullet holes.
Rocklin puts his hat on. He sees Arly looking down at the
torn letter.
Rocklin goes toward the bunk with his saddlebag.
Rocklin sits on the bunk and casually picks up Arly's knife.
That last from Arly brings a kind of smile to Rocklin's face --
a smile that says in effect -- "Are you kidding?" He gets up
from the bunk to go to the door, and finding himself still
holding Arly's knife, throws it back to her in a seemingly
casual manner. It passes too close to Arly for comfort and,
Rocklin just opening the door, gets the knife right back --
that close to his ear he feels the breeze. He looks at it,
quivering in the door. Then, moving to Arly in what could be
construed as a threatening manner, he takes her in his arms
and kisses her. Arly is caught completely unaware. Rocklin's
action disarms her. But it is, after all, what she really
wants, so before the kiss ends, Arly's arms slowly entwine
themselves around Rocklin's neck. In the middle of the kiss
Rocklin gently but forcefully takes her arms from around his
neck and puts her from him.
He goes to the bunk -- picks up his saddlebag, coat, etc.,
and starts for the door.
Arly has been silently watching.
Dave's voice is heard just outside the cabin door.
Dave now rushes through the door, puffing and excited.
He sees Arly and pulls up abruptly.
Rocklin gives Arly a disparaging side glance and starts out.
Rocklin is headed for the corral as Dave catches up to him.
Arly, her back to us, is standing in the open doorway watching
the two headed for the corral.
Her mood is evidenced by the manner in which she suddenly
slams shut the door. As she turns and leans against it, we
see tears in her eyes, and hear suppressed sobs. Her eyes
light on the bits of torn letter, and presently we see her
face set itself grimly, and now she walks toward the fireplace
and, passing the torn bite of paper, kicks at them viciously.
LONG SHOT -- of Rocklin as he comes riding into town. As he
nears the corner where the stage and Harolday's office is
situated, the CAMERA MOVES IN, getting Rocklin and one of
the Harolday employees repairing the wooden sidewalk near
the hitching rail.
The man nods.
He enters the building.
PANNING SHOT on Harolday as he sits at the desk working on a
ledger. The sound of a door opening is heard. Harolday looks
up casually as if expecting a customer, then suddenly gapes.
CAMERA PANS to include doorway in which stands Rocklin.
He pokes a finger through the hole in the crown. Harolday's
eyes narrow.
Rocklin looks at him with a queer expression without replying.
Harolday looks sharply toward the window.
MED. SHOT from office window. Clint is hurrying across from
the direction of the Sun-Up Saloon toward the office.
PANNING SHOT on Clint as he enters from street and crosses
to the door of Harolday's office.
MED. SHOT on door of inner office with Harolday at desk in
f.g. As the door opens it conceals Rocklin from Clint.
Clint looks quickly at Harolday and back at Rocklin with
frightened eyes.
Rocklin makes no reply.
He pulls out the tobacco pouch which Dave found at Table-
Top.
Clint as he stares wide-eyed at the pouch.
group, with Rocklin and Harolday both watching Clint intently.
Rocklin's disdainful smile takes the speech out of Clint,
who just sort of runs out of words. Rocklin hesitates for a
second then moves toward the door.
Harolday and Clint are at window looking past camera toward
the street. They see Rocklin carrying his saddle, walking
toward the Sun-Up. Shorty Davis hails Rocklin, says something
to him and points to the Sun-Up. Rocklin leaves, walking
faster.
He turns from camera toward the desk.
Rocklin comes down the hall carrying his saddle and looking
at the room numbers. As he nears the f.g. he locates the
room he is looking for (it is a room facing toward the rear
of the Sun-Up). He knocks. Almost immediately the door opens
and Clara stands there -- flushed and embarrassed.
This is the room in which Clara has arranged to meet Rocklin,
who later takes it as his own.
SHOT at door as Rocklin steps into the room.
Rocklin notes her confusion. He regards her with a slight
sympathetic smile. Then opens the door and exits.
CLOSE SHOT -- a letter written in a bold feminine hand. It
reads:
In answer to your letter of the 25th, kindly be advised that
my niece, Clara Caldwell, became of age January 11th of this
year. And, although I am no longer her legal guardian, it
behooves me, as her nearest kin, to show continued interest
in her affairs --
The CAMERA HOLDS LONG ENOUGH for the letter to be read. And
now the letter begins to be consumed in a flame as the CAMERA
PULLS BACK showing the burning letter in Judge Garvey's hand.
He is standing over the potbellied stove in his office, and
Miss Martin is close to him watching the letter burn. Garvey
finally lets it fall from his fingers onto the top of the
stove. He lifts the lid, lets the remains fall inside, and
smiles to Miss Martin.
The door opens and Rocklin enters. Miss Martin, who has been
pacing nervously, stops in her tracks. Garvey, taken
completely by surprise, feigns an affected casualness. Rocklin
eyes them both suspiciously as he slowly closes the door.
It is quite obvious to Garvey that Rocklin is here on
business. He turns to Miss Martin.
Miss Martin is in accord with that suggestion, and after
giving Rocklin the frigid eye, flounces out, slamming the
door.
Garvey shakes his head, wipes his brow, and is returning to
his desk.
SHOT -- door to Garvey's office. Miss Martin has her ear
glued to the panels. Over scene comes Rocklin's voice.
Miss Martin reacts.
SHOT -- Garvey and Rocklin.
SHOT -- door. Miss Martin reacts with nod of satisfaction
and leaves.
Rocklin goes to the filing cabinet where he opens the drawer
marked "C." As he fingers through the papers, Garvey sits
back in his chair, watching.
Rocklin pulls open the "M" drawer.
Not finding the letter in the "M" drawer, Rocklin goes to
the desk and pulls the handle of one of the drawers. It is
locked.
Garvey unlocks the drawer and opens it. It is found to contain
nothing but two brand new decks of playing cards.
The UNOPENED DECKS OF CARDS.
BACK TO SCENE. Garvey seems a little too anxious to close
the drawer, and before he can do so, Rocklin has one hand
inside. Garvey, checked for a second, looks up at Rocklin.
Rocklin slowly withdraws his hand, holding one of the decks.
The two regard each other silently a moment. Now Rocklin
casually slips the deck he holds into his pocket.
He takes a step away. Garvey turns him by touching his arm.
He starts around the desk toward the door. From the corner
of his eye he catches Garvey reaching for a gun in the middle
drawer. Before he can raise it, Rocklin is on him with a
blow that sends Garvey reeling back toward the stove.
Rocklin starts for the door again, and just misses being
struck by a chair which Garvey hurls with vicious fury. The
chair crashes against a window.
The sound of breaking glass attracts the attention of passers-
by, as well as Miss Martin seated in her surrey with Sammy,
the K.C. China-boy.
The two are now fighting in earnest.
of the fight, intercut with townspeople gathering outside.
Dave pulls up in his wagon.
It is pretty well wrecked. Rocklin has Garvey just about
done in. He gives him one final Sunday punch and Garvey goes
down and stays down. At that moment, Dave and Pap Fossler
enter followed by other curious natives.
They exit, and almost immediately Miss Martin enters, and
after gaping in horror at the appearance of the place, sees
the Judge, who, having regained consciousness, bestirs himself
on the floor.
Garvey, on his feet now, makes for the door leading to his
living quarters at the back of the office. Miss Martin follows
him.
She sees the bed and shrieks upon realizing where she is,
and backs out quickly, almost catching the door which Garvey
slams in her face.
Rocklin and Dave as they walk from Garvey's office. Dave has
a time hopping along against Rocklin's strides.
Dave leaves and exits from shot in the direction of the stage
office. Rocklin goes off toward the Sun-Up.
PANNING SHOT. Juan is lounging against the corner of the
building, soberly watching Rocklin's approach. As Rocklin
comes into the scene he spots Juan, and stops a moment as
though deciding whether or not to question him. During this,
Juan casually takes his ornamental tobacco pouch from his
pocket and begins to roll a cigarette.
The CAMERA PANS Rocklin to the side of the building and up
the outer stairs.
Rocklin comes through the door and down the hall. He reaches
his room, and is about to open the door when he hears a
familiar voice inside. He listens.
Rocklin frowns and enters.
Rocklin steps into the room, holding the door partly open as
he focuses his attention on Arly. Clara, who has been sitting
in the rocker near the window, gets up and is the first to
speak.
Rocklin closes the door.
Clara is terribly hurt, but struggles to be grown-up about
it.
Clara can say no more without breaking. So she turns away
quickly and hurries out the door. Rocklin does a slow burn
as he glares at Arly.
Rocklin makes no reply.
Arly is being ridiculous now. He ignores her remarks and
concentrates his attention on one of his hands -- he may
have sprained it slightly in the fight.
She takes a folded piece of paper out of her pocket and drops
it on the dresser as Rocklin watches her.
The door closes. Rocklin stands a moment. Now curiosity brings
him to the dresser where he takes up the paper and unfolds
it.
CLARA'S LETTER. The torn pieces have all been sorted and
pasted together on a sheet of paper
BACK TO SCENE. Rocklin holds the letter. He is mad. He shakes
his head -- What a gal --- Now he is almost smiling -- almost.
He folds the letter -- puts it in his pocket. Takes off his
gun-belt and hangs it over the rocker near the window, and
stretches out on the bed, as we
ON Clara hurrying toward the front door in a suppressed state
of excitement. She has presumably just arrived at the ranch
in advance of Miss Martin. She enters the house after a glance
toward the gate.
Clara enters hastily and beats a path to the door of her
room.
The door flies open. Clara bursts in, closing the door in
the same movement. Her eyes swing to someone o.s. and she
freezes to the spot.
Miss Martin, standing by the window, cold and threatening.
She has not taken the time to remove her hat. After a moment's
pause, she moves slowly toward Clara.
The CAMERA PANS WITH her into a TWO SHOT. Clara, her back
pressing harder and harder against the door, becomes more
terrified at the other's approach. Miss Martin appraises the
girl a short moment and now suddenly slaps her hard across
the face. Clara opens her mouth, about to scream, but even
stifles this impulse under the cold stare of her aunt.
Clara can only stare as one under an hypnotic spell.
Clara hasn't moved.
Clara merely gasps for a breath of air, but Miss Martin,
thinking her about to speak, goes on, more forcefully now.
Clara remains silent.
Clara, now utterly broken, moves away. Miss Martin, her eyes
still rivited on the girl, follows.
The office has been more or less cleaned up since the fight.
Garvey is discovered near the window. He has cleaned himself
up but bears some evidence of the fight. He is reading a
letter as Sammy, the K.C. China-boy, stands waiting near the
door.
LETTER. The message is written in the same bold hand of Miss
Martin already seen in the previous letter:
Mr. Garvey,
I have just learned that despicable Rocklin person intends
to take Clara to Garden City in the morning -- evidently to
have you investigated. I thought you had better know about
it.
BACK TO SCENE. Garvey puts the message in his pocket as he
addresses Sammy.
On Rocklin, stretched across the bed, examining the cards in
the light of a lamp.
Garvey comes from around the building's corner and peers
furtively through the darkness toward the lighted windows of
Rocklin's room.
The area in front of the Sun-Up. Dave's wagon pulls up to
the hitching rail in front of the saloon. Clint, stripped of
his gun, is driving with Dave, alertly watching him. They
get down from the wagon and Dave prods Clint toward the corner
of the building.
Garvey has left the spot where we saw him look up to Rocklin's
window. We now see him as he rounds a rear corner of the
building and goes toward the outer stairs leading to the Sun-
Up's second floor. He starts up the steps and stops almost
immediately and stares o.s.
From Garvey's ANGLE as he sees Dave bringing Clint from around
in front of the building toward the stairway.
Garvey steps quickly to the ground and takes up a position
around the roar corner. He watches the two men approach the
stairway and go up. He moves out of the shot now, going toward
the street. The CAMERA HOLDS on the corner, and we see Tala
come into view, as though from nowhere, and take the exact
position at the building's corner vacated by Garvey only a
moment before. It is apparent that he is watching Garvey,
and after a momentary pause he too moves stealthily out of
the scene.
PANNING SHOT on Rocklin asleep. He is fully dressed, as we
last saw him, with the exception of his boots. He is stretched
full length on top of the covers. His gun-belt still hangs
over the rocker, close to the open window. A knock on the
door brings him to a sitting position.
CAMERA PANS TO door as Clint enters reluctantly, followed by
the triumphant Dave.
He tosses Dave a coin, who catches it. Then Rocklin puts on
his boots.
Dave exits.
Rocklin begins rolling a cigarette as he moves toward Clint.
An unidentifiable form is seen moving through the darkness
toward the outer stairway. As it nears the stairway, the
CAMERA MOVES IN so that as the mysterious figure begins
stealthily up the stairs, we see only the feet through the
rungs.
The CAMERA THEN PANS QUICKLY AND ZOOMS INTO A CLOSE SHOT of
Juan, across the alley. And now through Juan's eyes we watch
the ascent of the mysterious intruder: The Mexican's line of
vision gradually raises, then the eyes slowly move across
the camera as the dark figure proceeds along to the rear
portion of the verandah.
Rocklin finishes rolling his cigarette and lights it.
The mysterious form has moved past the darkened windows along
the verandah and is nearing Rocklin's lighted room -- stops
close to the open window.
SHOT -- Rocklin and Clint.
Clint tenses -- stares -- finds breathing difficult.
Rocklin slaps Clint's face open-handed, throwing him off
balance, then grabs him by the shirt front.
Completely terrified, Clint opens his mouth as if about to
speak. Suddenly he sees something out of the shot over
Rocklin's shoulder and his expression changes. Rocklin looks
quickly in the same direction.
window. A gloved hand has come out of the dark and is reaching
through the window for Rocklin's gun in the belt which is
hanging over the chair.
Clint and Rocklin. The latter is still looking toward the
window. With a swift movement Clint picks up the water jug
from the washstand and brings it down on Rocklin's head. As
Rocklin falls out of shot, Clint turns to the window with a
triumphant smile. Suddenly his expression changes.
There is a shot from o.s. and Clint's hands go to his stomach.
With a gasp of pain he doubles up and collapses on the floor.
window. The hand of the killer pitches the gun toward Rocklin
and disappears.
Lined up at the bar are Dave, Pap Fossler, Shorty Davis and
a few others. Cap is in his usual place. At the poker table
are Doc Riding, Sam Haynes, Ab Jenkins and one or two others.
The shot has evidently been heard, for everything seems to
have stopped, and Dave and Pap Fussier are looking up toward
the ceiling, as are others. Now Dave snaps back to life --
gulps down his drink, and hurries toward the stairs. As he
starts up, the others move slowly in the same direction.
Rocklin is on the floor, groggy. He shakes his head, and as
his senses return, he picks up the gun and just gets to his
feet as Dave rushes in.
Dave sees Clint's body on the floor -- notices the gun in
Rocklin's hand. He opens his mouth to speak but nothing comes
out. All he can do is stare and grimace. The sound of hurrying
feet comes from the hall, and presently the mob closes in,
crowding the room and the hall.
Pap Fossler, who has been one of the first to enter, kneels
over Clint.
During this, there are general ad libs from the crowd.
Doc's voice is heard from the hall as he makes his way through
the jam.
Doc riding comes through the crowd, kneels beside Pap Fossler.
He needs only a glance to know he can be of no use.
A voice is heard from the hall.
Rocklin, still holding his gun as he stares down at Clint's
body o.s. Now he studies the faces of the mob.
of the crowd. There is nothing but a sea of hostile faces.
The crowd parts to admit Jackson, who comes stalking in
followed by Judge Garvey.
He stops abruptly as he sees Clint's body. Now he levels his
eyes on Rocklin.
He steps back so no one is behind him. And there is something
about his manner and tone that urges Jackson to use
discretion.
The crowd stares in skeptical silence. Even Dave thinks
Rocklin is lying, and now does his best to protect his friend.
Dave winces.
Harolday, followed by Shorty Davis, is making his way down
the hall from the inner stair landing. As he nears the crowd
gathered at Rocklin's door, Juan comes into view down the
hall, having just entered through the door leading out onto
the verandah.
Harolday enters, over the ad libs of the mob, followed by
Shorty Davis. During the following action, Juan enters and
stands near the door, silently taking in everything.
Harolday, as he sees Clint's body and stops dead in horror.
He turns to Rocklin.
Rocklin gives Garvey a hard, slow look.
She stares down at Clint. An expression of pity comes over
her. Now she looks coldly at Rocklin.
with Rocklin in f.g.
He makes a tentative movement toward Rocklin but Arly
intervenes.
There is a moment's amazed silence. Then the crowd breaks
into derisive comment.
with Garvey in f.g.
Arly, who has been staring at Rocklin in frowning
bewilderment.
Rocklin.
with Garvey in f.g. Close beside him are Pap and Dave, who
watches Garvey closely.
The crowd tenses. Rocklin eyes them grimly.
He moves over to the open window, and with his gun leveled
on the mob, steps out onto the verandah. Once outside, he
suddenly lets the window fall and disappears. A shot from
Jackson's gun shatters a pane, during which time there has
been a rush to the window. It is Arly and Dave who reach it
first, and feigning an attempt to raise the window, they
momentarily delay pursuit.
There is the inevitable jam as the pushing, yelling crowd
all try to exit at once.
Rocklin, as he picks himself off the ground, having dropped
from the verandah. He starts quickly away.
SHOOTING INTO the room, we see Arly and Dave shoved to one
side by Jackson and Garvey. The window goes up and Jackson
steps out, followed by Garvey, Harolday, Arly, Dave, and
others.
The human jam has been broken, and now the mob dashes wildly
toward the stairway, and verandah exit in the b.g.
The hitching rail in front of the Sun-Up. There are a dozen
or so horses tied up to it and close to it is Dave's team
and wagon. Rocklin comes from around the corner of the
building and races to the hitching rail.
Jackson and Garvey come from around the corner of the porch
followed by Harolday, Arly, Dave, and others. At the stairs
they collide with some of the men who have raced down the
hall, only to reach the stairway at the same moment. There
is another jam on the landing as the mob all try to get down
at once.
He has cut the lines of the horses tied to the rail. We see
him cutting the last line and fire into the air. The horses
rare and stampede.
And now there is a state of utter confusion as the mob and
horses rush in all directions as the men try to retrieve
their mounts. Rocklin is no where in evidence.
Dave climbs into his wagon behind the group as Jackson exits
quickly.
At hitching rail. There are four or five horses tied up here.
Arly and Juan enter and mount their horses, and almost
immediately Garvey and Harolday come hurrying into the scene
after two of the other horses.
Before either of the two men can answer, Jackson's voice is
heard shouting o.s.
The CAMERA PANS AROUND, getting Jackson, now mounted, as
others come riding in. He rares his horse around and starts
away followed by the mob, including our principals. They do
not get very far when Dave's wagon comes into the shot, going
hell-bent in pursuit.
The posse riding hard, with Dave's wagon following.
Dave, half standing as he urges his team on. Behind him are
the closed flaps of the wagon top.
as a hand reaches out from between the flaps and grasps the
reins. Dave takes it, and looks wildly around -- falls back
on the seat.
CAMERA PULLS BACK to include Dave, smiling broadly. Rocklin
is pulling hard on the reins.
With that Rocklin starts swinging the team around.
Sammy, the China-boy, is nervously knocking on Miss Martin's
door. It opens and Miss Martin is seen slipping a robe over
her long Mother Hubbard nightgown, with cap to match.
Sammy points o.s. -- Miss Martin looks and freezes.
As she moves down the hall, the CAMERA PANS WITH her until
it gets two men standing near the entrance door.
Now the CAMERA MOVES IN TO A THREE SHOT and we recognize
George Clews and his brother, Bob. Bob, his wrist bandaged,
takes off his hat at Miss Martin's approach, and George
noticing, does likewise.
He opens the door.
They start out.
Clara is seen in her nightgown, listening at the door to her
room. The sound of the outer door closing comes over the
scene and she hurries to her bed and feigns sleep, and just
in time, for the door opens and Miss Martin sticks her head
in, and satisfied that Clara is sleeping, exits.
A raspy voice is heard coming out of the darkness singing a
ribald song of the periods. And now Old Zeke, riding his
burro, comes into view. As he passes close to the camera, we
PAN and get the posse coming out of the darkness in the
opposite direction Zeke is travelling.
As the posse pulls up to Zeke, the CAMERA MOVES IN on a group
including Zeke, Jackson, Garvey, Harolday.
The posse swings around and starts back toward Santa Inez.
Arly watches the posse, then turns to Juan.
Arly does not answer in words. But Juan sees the answer in
her eyes. Now she tosses her head defiantly and swings her
horse off the road in the direction of the canyon. Juan
watches a moment, then spurs his mount after her, as we
On Clara, tossing fitfully in her bed. Suddenly she sits up
as an idea begins to take form in her mind. Now she hurries
out of bed, moves stealthily to the door and goes out, leaving
her door open.
ON door to Miss Martin's room. Clara comes down the hall to
the door. She puts her ear close and listens. Now she opens
it cautiously and peers inside. The door to her room is
slammed o.s. by a sporadic draft. It startles the girl and
she quickly closes Miss Martin's door and hurries away.
ON the posse, riding hell-bent.
Arly and Julio, as they slowly pick their way along the
difficult trail, skirting a roaring torrent. Julio is leading
and close behind him Arly is having a time negotiating the
unsteady ground of a landslide.
She notices Julio staring o.s. and slowly shaking his head.
Julio nods his head slowly, deliberately.
A faint smile of admiration brushes Arly's face.
Arly lashes her horse away. Julio realizes the futileness of
further pleading and now moves his horse out after Arly.
The wagon with Dave and Rocklin coming out of the night.
Dave is driving the team for all it is worth. Rocklin is
looking back. He turns to Dave.
A wooden gate is swung closed across the roadway. On the
gate is a crudely printed weather-beaten sign: K.C. RANCH.
Over the scene comes the SOUND of the wagon approaching.
Rocklin hops out, opens the gate. Dave drives the wagon
through. As Rocklin lets go the gate, it swings closed of
its own accord.
The shed is a short distance from the Caldwell house. Bob
Clews is standing at a corner of the shed looking o.s. Over
the scene comes the SOUND of the wagon.
The wagon moving slowly through the cottonwoods, along the
drive not far from the house. It stops now, and the CAMERA
MOVES CLOSER to get Dave and Rocklin as they leave the team
and start stealthily toward the house seen in the moonlight
in the b.g.
We pick up Clara in the act of nervously pinning on her hat
in the dim light of a small lamp. She is fully dressed, and
once the hat is on, she looks around anxiously for her top
coat which she finds in the closet. She takes the coat and
starts hurriedly toward the lamp, sitting on a small taboret
near the door. As she bends over to blow it out, her eyes
raise and she freezes.
Now she snaps the door closed without removing her eyes from
Clara, and starts forward.
The CAMERA PULLS BACK to include the two. Clara stands as
one under an hypnotic spell.
Rocklin quickly shushes Dave.
If Dave keeps quiet any longer he'll burst. He spins Rocklin
around and speaks in his natural voice.
From Rocklin's expression it is quite apparent to Dave that
he is right.
Both women are staring dumbly toward the window. Now the
realization that she has been overheard staggers Miss Martin.
She utters a stifled scream and, seeing Rocklin starting
through the window, runs from the room.
Dave scrambles through the window and hurries in pursuit of
Miss Martin. Rocklin is at Clara's side.
Bushes near the house. George and Bob Clews are crouched,
watching.
They move out.
The posse riding hard.
We see Arly and Julio as they descend a steep embankment
toward the raging torrent. They both are riding Julio's horse.
Arly and Julio; Arly seated behind Julio, considerably
disheveled and sobbing.
As they move away into a longer shot, a huge boulder comes
crashing down the canyon side, across their path, and tumbles
with a great roar and splash into the torrent.
Clara is talking feverishly to Rocklin.
Dave enters from the hall carrying Miss Martin over his
shoulder. He has her wrapped in a sheet and bound up in
tassled curtain cord.
George and Bob Clews at the window. George has his gun
leveled, and a dirty smile twists his face.
The CAMERA PULLS BACK as George Clews climbs into the room,
followed by Bob. They disarm both Rocklin and Dave as Clara
watches helplessly, and Miss Martin struggles in her wrapping.
Dave puts Miss Martin down and begins undoing her as Bob
covers him with his gun.
The posse riding.
Arly and Juan leave the hazardous trail behind and now start
across the flat on a run.
Dave has unwrapped Miss Martin and she gets to her feet
bristling.
Bob Clews tosses the sheet over Dave's head. And as Dave
struggles,
Rocklin thinks he has George off guard and makes a pass at
him. But George is on the alert and strikes Rocklin on the
head with his pistol.
She utters a choked cry and falls to the floor in a faint.
as Miss Martin comes to Clara and kneels beside her.
of the room. Bob Clews has Dave securely tied, and now assists
Miss Martin in getting Clara to the bed.
George Clews picks up the unconscious Rocklin.
Bob hurries to do so.
The posse riding.
Dave's wagon. Bob Clews is seen dumping Dave into the rear
of the wagon. George Clews stands near him with Rocklin's
unconscious form over his shoulder. Now he puts Rocklin in.
Bob runs after the horses. George gets onto the wagon seat --
swings the team around and heads for the gate.
Arly and Juan riding hard.
George Clews sits in the wagon waiting for Bob, who now comes
out of the darkness with their horses. He dismounts, ties
the horses to the back of the wagon, comes around in front
to the gate. He is about to swing it open when he looks past
the camera at Arly and Juan, who now pull up to the outside
of the gate. Arly dismounts quickly, her gun in her hand.
Bob Clews backs up toward the wagon as Arly walks through
gate.
of Arly.
George Clews on the wagon seat. He is smiling and is going
to try to bluff it out.
Arly.
Rocklin has regained consciousness and listens.
Rocklin recognizes Arly's voice. Now he raises himself up
over the tailboard and falls out.
The horses tied in back shy as Rocklin falls to the ground.
Arly, as she takes it and starts toward the rear of the wagon.
He no more than gets it out when a knife whirls in from o.s.,
getting him in the small of the back.
He sits calmly astride his horse, his gun leveled on George
Clews.
Arly is cutting the rope binding Rocklin.
Rocklin gets to his feet. Arly notices something shining on
the ground where Rocklin lay. She picks it up. It is the
tobacco pouch with the steer's head of hammered silver.
On Dave's Wrapped form, kicking the wagon tailboard. Arly's
head appears between the flaps above the tailboard and as
Dave groans and kicks, she takes her knife and slits the
rope binding him.
Rocklin has come to George clew and we see him wrest the gun
from his hand and yank George down from the wagon seat. Once
down, he lets him have a hard right that sends him sprawling.
They start fighting viciously. Arly rushes in crying wildly.
Rocklin. There is but one thought in his enraged mind --
Clews. He tears into him again.
The posse approaching.
Rocklin, Arly, Dave, Rocklin is about done in from the fight.
Arly's plea goes unheeded and he starts away toward the house
on the run.
Dave runs after Rocklin.
She takes up the reins now and swings the team around and
off the road into the thickness of the trees.
Rocklin and Dave. They are approaching the house warily.
Arly is seated on the wagon seat looking toward the gate as
Juan comes in on his horse.
At gate. The posse rides up. The gate is swung open and they
ride through.
At wagon. Arly jumps to the ground and speaks to Juan.
As she starts toward the house, Juan dismounts and follows.
The posse comes riding in. Jackson, Garvey, Harolday, and a
few others dismount and go toward the door.
as they move stealthily into a spot shielded by undergrowth,
which gives them full view of the front and one side of the
house.
Miss Martin is coming into the room with a glass and a pill
for Clara, who is still stretched on the bed.
The sound of someone knocking on the front door comes over
the scene. Miss Martin exits hurriedly.
At front door. Miss Martin opens the door, confronting Jackson
and the group. She is bewildered.
As all but Garvey and Harolday go back to their horses, Garvey
speaks.
Garvey looks at Harolday in a manner evidencing his distaste
and impatience.
The sound of running horses comes over the scene as Harolday
hurries away and Garvey enters the house.
He starts to mount, but instead leads the horse into the
bushes close to where Juan and Arly are watching.
Miss Martin and Garvey have been talking. Garvey paces
nervously.
Rocklin has his ear glued to the door. He can't help but
smile at Miss Martin's reference to him. Dave is behind the
curtain at the window, watching the outside. Clara is close
to Rocklin.
Clara tiptoes away.
Arly and Juan, as they watch Harolday approach the house and
go to the hall window.
Garvey and Miss Martin. Garvey is still pacing very nervously.
He is trying to think of his next move.
Garvey stops and glares.
Garvey stops and looks at her again.
It is open and Rocklin stands there looking o.s.
She can say no more.
Rocklin steps away from the door, where Dave and Clara now
stand. He has Garvey covered. Dave is pointing his gun, and
grimacing at Miss Martin.
At hall window -- on Harolday watching.
Garvey is stepping back, in a cold sweat, toward Miss Martin,
as Rocklin advances toward him.
Miss Martin opens her mouth, about to speak.
of Dave.
Miss Martin. Her mouth snaps shut like a trap.
Garvey, Rocklin, Miss Martin. Rocklin takes the tobacco pouch
out of his pocket.
Harolday at hall window. He raises his gun -- he is about to
fire when a knife whirls out of nowhere and sticks in the
window frame, inches from Harolday's head. He spins around
and stares wildly here and there at the darkness.
There is no one in evidence.
He drops the gun. Arly and Juan come in to him. Arly has him
covered.
The CAMERA PULLS BACK to a WIDER ANGLE, getting the front
door as it is opened by Rocklin, who evidently heard Arly.
Arly is prodding Harolday into the scene.
Harolday is herded inside, close to Garvey and Miss Martin.
In the pause Harolday remains sneeringly silent.
Harolday looks at Juan, who slowly nods.
He brings up the tobacco pouch. But before he can ask about
it, Arly speaks.
Juan nods.
Rocklin, with a sudden transition, speaks to Harolday in a
hard, threatening tone.
Harolday doesn't answer. He finally looks at Garvey in
desperation. Perspiration runs down Garvey's forehead.
Suddenly Harolday makes a mad dash for the door. Rocklin
shoots, but Arly pushes his arm and sends the shot wild.
Rocklin looks at her in amazement. Julio hurries out.
On Harolday as he rushes madly across the clearing toward
the bushes where his horse waits.
The CAMERA SWINGS BACK to the porch in time to catch Julio
crossing it in pursuit of Harolday. Arly and Rocklin come
through the open door and stand on the porch watching.
They see Julio disappear in the brush. For a moment nothing
happens; now Harolday's horse bolts out, riderless, and
gallops away. Now Julio comes slowly into view. He moves
slowly and deliberately back toward the house.
Julio comes in to Rocklin and Arly. The three exchange
significant glances as we
In the hall are Clara and Miss Martin, Rocklin, Arly and
Julio, Dave and Garvey. Garvey is seated and has evidently
been talking in the way of confession.
She is beside herself in her anger -- and taking up a large
vase sitting nearby, she smashes it to pieces over Garvey's
head. Garvey goes down unconscious. Miss Martin rushes to
her room screaming. Clara follows her.
He starts away down the hall, rolling up his sleeves.
Rocklin's eyes wander to Clara, who seems quite at a loss.
Now he moves slowly toward her. In the b.g. Arly watches
Rocklin's every move.
After a slight pause in which she becomes conscious of Arly,
Clara speaks.
There is another short pause. Rocklin glances at Arly, and
Arly assuming they want to be alone, turns and goes out the
door, leaving Julio attending Garvey.
Rocklin takes it -- a faint smile brushes his face. He turns
now and walks out.
Arly is seated on the shaft of an old wagon. The first rays
of the morning sun streak through the trees across her as
she smiles wistfully down at the antics of a little woodchuck
cavorting on the ground close to her. In a moment Rocklin
comes into view in the b.g. He spots Arly, who has her back
to him, and walks over. His approach frightens the woodchuck
away, and turns Arly's head toward him. Neither has anything
to say. Now Rocklin sits beside Arly, but faces the other
way.
There is another stilted pause.
There is another pause. But worlds are being said in the
language of eyes. Their heads move closer and now Rocklin's
arms sweep around the girl and they kiss.
The two stop abruptly and look o.s.

White letters on a black screen:
The wicked flee when none pursueth.
The quotation fades.
A woman's voice:
The street of a western town, night. The street is deserted. Snow falls.
We track slowly forward.
A shape lies in the street below the busted-out porch railing of a two-story building. A
sign identifies the building as the Monarch Boarding House.
The crumpled shape is a body. We hear the thunder of approaching hooves.
A galloping horse enters frame and recedes, whipped on by a bareback rider. A long-
barreled rifle is tied across the rider's back with a sash cord.
He disappears into the falling snow.
We are looking into the window of a moving train.
Looking out past us is a fourteen-year-old girl, Mattie Ross. Next to her is Yarnell, a
middle-aged black man. Reading backward in the mirror of the window we see a station
sign easing in as the train slows: FORT SMITH.
The voice-over continues:
Candlelight flickers over the man's waxy features.
The body, wrapped in a shroud, lies in a pine coffin. Mattie and Yarnell stand looking
down at it. An undertaker, grizzled and severely dressed, holds the candle.
If you would loik to kiss him it would be all roight.
He has gone home. Praise the lord.
Put the lid on. Why is it so much?
The quality of the casket and of the embalming. The loifloik
appearance requires time and art. And the chemicals come
dear. The particulars are in your bill. If you would loik to
kiss him it would be all roight.
No. Thank you. The spirit has flown. Your wire said fifty
dollars.
You did not specify he was to be shipped.
Well sixty dollars is every cent we have. It leaves nothing
for our board. Yarnell, you can see to the body's transport to
the train station and accompany it home, and I will have to
sleep here tonight.
I don't think your mama'd want you to stay in this town by
yourself.
It can't be helped. I still have to collect father's things and
see to some other business.
But I's your chap-a-rone! Your mama didn't say for you to
see to no business here!
It is business Mama doesn't know about. It's all right,
Yarnell, I dismiss you.
To the undertaker:
Mattie looks around the empty room.
Three men stand upon a rough-hewn three-banger gallows. The condemned are two white
men and an Indian. They wear new jeans and flannel shirts buttoned to the neck. Each has
a noose around his neck. One of the white men is addressing the crowd:
Mattie is pushing her way through the spectators thronging the town square.
Up on the gallows the condemned speaker starts to weep.
His blubbering will not let him go on. He steps back. A man standing by slips a black
hood over his head which continues to bob with sobbing.
Mattie hisses to a woman nearby:
The woman indicates a figure among the officiators on the scaffold:
The second condemned man is speaking:
A thinking pause. He nods, shrugging.
He steps back and is hooded.
The third man steps forward.
He is hooded, speech cut short. The hangman, hand to his elbow, helps him step back.
The executioner pulls a lever on the scaffold. Three trapdoors swing open and three men
drop. They hit the end of their ropes with a crack.
Two of the men have their heads snapped to an angle and are limp and twist slowly. One,
though, writhes and kicks, jackknifing his legs.
Sullivan continues to writhe and kick.
Mattie looks down at a boy selling hot tamales out of a bucket.
Mattie is talking to the sheriff whom we saw officiating on the scaffold. The square is
emptying and, in the background, all three men twist slowly, the last man having finally
given up the ghost. The Mexican boy still hawks tamales to stragglers.
The sheriff looks at the girl and chuckles.
Rapping at a door of rough plank.
After a beat, a voice--rasping and slurred:
Wider. We see that Mattie stands before an outhouse.
Beat.
No response. Mattie reaches up and raps again, vigorously.
Beat.
A coffin is dropped heavily into frame and we see, chalked onto the freshly milled wood of
its top:
After a resting beat, during which the coffin's handlers presumably adjust their grip, the
coffin is shoved away over the straw-littered planking of a rail freight car. Once it has
been pushed fully in, the upright planking of the boxcar door blurs through frame in the
extreme foreground til the door slams to rest.
We hear the steam engine start to chug, and the foreground door moves slowly off with the
grinding motion of the train.
Swinging open. It is the barnlike door to the mortician's workroom; the Irish undertaker
holds it open for Mattie. She carries a bedroll.
Three bodies lay under shrouds on a high work table. The arm of the nearest sticks out,
rope burns on its wrist. Three coffins are in various stages of assembly.
Mattie unwinds the bedroll onto the floor.
Mattie strides along, looking at facades. She stops, looking at the signage on a barnlike
building:
Mattie steps to the doorway of an office set in a corner of the stable.
Stonehill looks up from his desk. He eyes the girl up and down.
Stonehill sets his pen down and leans back.
Beat.
Stonehill chuckles.
Stonehill stares.
all liability from the beginning of the world to date. The
offer is more than liberal and I make it only to avoid the
possibility of troublesome litigation.
I will take two hundred dollars for Judy, plus one hundred
for the ponies and twenty-five dollars for the gray horse that
Tom Chaney left. He is easily worth forty. That is three
hundred twenty-five dollars total.
The ponies have no part of this. I will not buy them.
Then the price for Judy is three hundred twenty-five dollars.
I would not pay three hundred and twenty-five dollars for
winged Pegasus! As for the gray horse, it does not belong to
you! And you are a snip!
The gray was lent to Tom Chaney by my father. Chaney
only had the use of him. Your other points are beneath
comment.
I will pay two hundred and twenty-five dollars and keep the
gray horse. I don't want the ponies.
I cannot accept that. (she stands) There can be no
settlement after I leave this office. It will go to law.
This is my last offer. Two hundred and fifty dollars. For
that I get the release previously discussed and I keep your
father's saddle. I am also writing off a feed and stabling
charge. The gray horse is not yours to sell. You are an
unnatural child.
The saddle is not for sale. I will keep it. Lawyer Dagget can
prove ownership of the gray horse. He will come after you
with a writ of replevin.
We are tracking down the street we toward the Monarch Boarding House.
Mattie is humping a saddle up the street. She stops before the boarding house. She looks
at its sign. She looks at its busted-out porch railing.
A Marjorie Main-like woman crushes Mattie to her bosom.
Mattie grimaces, arms pinned to her sides.
A blanket is unrolled to reveal a watch, a cheap knife, and a long-barreled Colt's dragoon
revolver. Voice off:
We hear wind whistling through cracks in the floorboards and walls.
We hear snoring.
There is one bed, not large, with two shapes in it.
We cut in closer to find Mattie lying on her back, staring. She shivers, shoulders hunched.
The thin blanket barely covers her.
She pulls the blanket gently, slowly, so that it covers her exposed side.
A beat of snoring, a snorfle, and then, as we hold on Mattie, the crackle of mattress ticking
under a shifting body--and the blanket is pulled away toward the unseen snorer.
Voices echo from inside the courtroom. Mattie cracks a heavy oak door and slips in.
The gallery is crowded. Mattie is at the back of a press of standees.
Her point-of-view, semi-obstructed: on the witness stand is Rooster Cogburn, a rough-
hewn man going to middle-aged fat. He has a patch over one eye.
And then?
Well he died on us. Passed away in considerable pain.
What did you do then?
Me and Marshal Potter went out to the smokehouse and that
rock had been moved and that jar was gone.
Objection. Speculative.
Sustained.
You found a flat gray rock at the corner of the smokehouse
with a hollowed-out space under it?
If the prosecutor is going to give evidence I suggest that he
be sworn.
Marshal Cogburn, what did you find, if anything, at the
corner of the smokehouse?
We found a flat gray rock with a hollowed-out space under
it. Nothin there.
And what did--
No jar or nothin.
What did you do then?
Well we rode up to the Whartons', near where the North
Fork strikes the Canadian, branch of the Canadian.
And what did you find?
I had my glass and we spotted the two boys and their old
daddy, Aaron Wharton, down there on the creek bank with
some hogs. They'd killed a shoat and was butchering it.
They'd built a fire under a wash pot for scalding water.
What did you do?
Crept down. I announced that we was U.S. marshals and
hollered to Aaron that we needed to talk to his boys. He
picked up a axe and commenced to cussing us and
blackguarding this court.
What did you do then?
Backed away trying to talk some sense into him. But C.C.
edges over by the wash pot and picks up a shotgun. Potter
seen him but it was too late. C.C. Wharton pulled down on
Potter with one barrel and then turned to do the same for me
with the other. I shot him and when the old man swung the
axe I shot him. Odus lit out and I shot him. Aaron Wharton
and C.C. Wharton was dead when they hit the ground but
Odus was just winged.
Did you find the jar with the hundred and twenty dollars in
it?
Leading.
Sustained.
What happened then?
I found the jar with a hundred and twenty dollars in it.
And what happened to Marshal Potter?
Died. Leaves a wife and six babies.
Objection.
Strike the comment.
And what became of Odus Wharton?
There he sets.
Okay. You may ask, Mr. Goudy.
Thank you, Mr. Barlow. In your four years as U.S. marshal,
Mr. Cogburn, how many men have you shot?
Objection.
There is more to this shooting than meets the eye, Judge
Parker. I will establish the bias of this witness.
Objection is overruled.
How many, Mr. Cogburn?
Beat.
The history is relevant your honor. Goes to Cogburn's
methods and animosities.
Okay.
Did you also shoot Dub Wharton, brother, and Clete
Wharton, half-brother?
Clete was selling ardent spirits to the Cherokee. He come at
me with a king bolt.
You were armed and he advanced upon you with nothing but
a king bolt? From a wagon tongue?
I've seen men badly tore up with things no bigger than a
king bolt. I defended myself.
And, returning to the encounter with Aaron and his two
remaining sons, you sprang from cover with your revolver in
hand?
I did.
Loaded and cocked?
If it ain't loaded and cocked it don't shoot.
And like his son, Aaron Wharton advanced against an armed
man?
He was armed. He had that axe raised.
Yes. I believe you testified that you backed away from
Aaron Wharton?
That is right.
Which direction were you going?
I always go backwards when I'm backing up.
Very amusing I suppose--for all of us except Aaron
Wharton. Now, he advanced upon you much in the manner
of Clete Wharton menacing you with that king bolt or rolled-
up newspaper or whatever it was.
Yes sir. He commenced to cussing and laying about with
threats.
And you were backing away? How many steps before the
shooting started?
Seven, eight steps?
Aaron Wharton keeping pace, advancing, away from the fire
seven eight steps--what would that be, fifteen, twenty feet?
I suppose.
Will you explain to the jury, Mr. Cogburn, why Mr. Wharton
was found immediately by the wash pot with one arm in the
fire, his sleeve and hand smoldering?
Well.
Mattie waits as people file out. She pushes forward to meet Cogburn when he emerges,
muttering.
He does not look up from the cigarette he is trying to roll. His hands are shaking.
She takes the fixings and rolls, licks, and twists the cigarette.
Cogburn gazes at her.
She opens it. Cogburn smiles.
Mattie climbs the few steps from the street. Her attention is drawn by:
A man sitting on a chair to one side enjoying the quiet of the evening. He is dressed for
riding, with perhaps a bit too much panache. It is almost dark and he is hard to see but it
seems he is watching Mattie, amused.
He raises a pipe to his mouth and pulls at it. The glow from the excited bowl kicks on his
eyes, which are indeed tracking her.
Mattie, discomfited by his look, turns hastily forward and pushes open the door. A
jingling sound prompts one more glance to the side.
The man's face is now hidden by his hat. Just before Mattie's point of view, now a lateral
track, starts to lose him behind the door jamb, he raises a spurred boot to push against the
porch rail and tip his chair back. He raises his other foot, spur jingling, and drapes it over
the first.
We are pushing in on the landlady.
As before, unseen Grandma Turner snores loudly as wind whistles and Mattie shivers.
Fade to black.
Very quiet.
In the quiet, a faint crickle-crackle of flame. It is followed by a lip-pop and a deep inhale.
Mattie opens her eyes. She is beaded with sweat. She looks blearily up.
The room is dim. A man sits facing her in a straghtback chair, faintly backlit by the
daylight leaking through the curtained window behind him. He exhales pipesmoke.
The man rises and, spurs jingling, crosses to the window, and throws open the curtain.
Mattie squints at him against the daylight:
The man has a cowlick and barndoor ears and is once again well-accoutered for riding. He
steps away from the window and reseats himself.
LeBoeuf takes a small photograph from his coat.
Mattie looks at the picture through red-rimmed eyes.
Mattie declines to contradict. LeBoeuf continues:
LeBoeuf tips back in his chair and draws back his coat to display a star. A smug look.
LeBoeuf's smile stays in place with effort.
LeBoeuf stands.
Mattie rolls away onto her side.
Her eyelids droop.
Spurs jingle and fade away.
Distant voices from the street. Clanging church bell. Very close, the clink of bottle
against cup.
Mattie looks blearily over. The room is now filled with long shadows.
The landlady has materialized at the side of the bed. She is pouring something from a
bottle into a ceramic cup.
Mattie obediently rises to an elbow, drinks, then drops back onto the pillow. A clunk:
The landlady has set the bottle down on the nightstand.
Mattie squints at the bottle:
The room's shadows grow longer still and crawl up the bottle.
The voice of the unseen landlady echoes and trails away:
From outside, the sound of a horse approaching at a gallop.
We cut outside. It is snowing, and night again.
Frank Ross's body is once again in the street before the boarding house.
The bareback horseman enters frame and recedes, rifle tied to his back.
A saddled horse stands in the middle of the street, pointed at the receding Tom Chaney.
Chaney disappears down the dark street into the falling snow.
Small hands reach up and wrap the saddlehorn on the waiting horse.
Mattie's face appears over the saddle as she tries to pull herself up.
Close on her feet rising from the ground, then pedaling, seeking purchase. There are no
stirrups.
Close on Mattie again. Sweating, she succeeds in chinning and elbowing herself onto the
horse's back. The sound of the fleeing horseman has receded almost to nothing.
She gets herself arranged in the saddle. She looks down for the reins.
The reins hang down from the bit.
She lies forward onto the horse's neck, a fistful of mane in one hand, reaching with the
other. . . reaching down. . . her fingers curl around the reins. . . she pulls.
The horse tosses its head and rears.
Mattie's legs squeeze the horses flanks.
Her fingers tighten on the horses mane but she is slipping, falling. . .
In the boarding house bedroom Mattie's hands clutch at pillow.
It is dark.
A phlegm-hawking sound.
A woman in a nightgown, face obscured by sleeping bonnet, approaches the bed and
disappears around its far side.
The sound of the old woman climbing into bed and settling.
After a beat, the covers are yanked from Mattie.
After another beat--snoring.
The door bangs open at the cut and Mattie emerges with an envelope.
It is day.
Mattie walks down the street holding the ripped-open envelope in one hand and some
unfolded papers in the other, the topmost of which she reads as she walks.
We hear the letter's contents in a gruff male voice-over:
Thrust onto a desk.
Wider shows that we are once again in the office of Stonehill, the stock trader. He
examines the release through bleary eyes, displaying none of his former vinegar.
The trader's eyes are still on the paper:
He drops the paper.
He works a key in a drawer and takes out money and counts during the following.
He hands the money across and Mattie counts to confirm.
We are tracking along a line of stalls toward a small corral holding a black mustang,
among other ponies.
Mattie is approaching the horse. A black stablehand has been trailing her, humping her
father's saddle.
She rubs the muzzle of the black horse.
She takes the saddle from the stablehand and tries to throw it over the horse. She is not tall
or strong enough.
The stableboy helps, then helps her up.
The horse does not move for a long beat.
The stableboy is laughing.
She kicks lightly and the horse abruptly pitches once or twice and then starts prancing.
The stableboy, still laughing, stands in the middle of a circle defined by the prancing horse.
Mattie leans forward to calm the horse, rubbing the muzzle and shushing him.
She straightens.
She reins the horse around and heads for the door, calling back:
The receding stableboy is uncomfortable.
Whipped up at the cut.
Peering in is Mattie; holding the makeshift curtain open is an elderly Chinese.
Behind them we can see the shelves of a modest grocery store and in the deep background
its bright street-facing window.
Reverse: a squalid living area crowded with effects. It is dim. There is snoring. Rooster
Cogburn is in a Chinese rope bed, his weight bowing it almost to the ground.
Mattie steps in.
Mattie ignores him, poking at Rooster as the grocer withdraws, letting the canvas drop
behind him.
Rooster opens his eyes, blinks.
He focuses on Mattie, swings his legs out, rumbles, and spits on the floor.
He reaches over a pouch of tobacco and begins fumbling with cigarette makings.
A voice from the front of the store:
Mattie takes out some cash.
Rooster is sobered by the sight of the currency.
Mattie takes the cigarette fixings at which Rooster is fumbling and works on a cigarette.
He spits again.
She hands him the finished cigarette.
Rooster is patting at his chest.
She lights his cigarette.
The word detonates a fit of coughing.
Rooster stares, nonplussed.
He drops back into the rope bed, which sets it swaying. As he stares up at the ceiling:
Mattie makes early-morning preparations to leave as Grandma Turner snores. She unrolls
her father's traps and takes out a big-brimmed fisherman's hat and puts it on: too big. She
lines it with newspaper, experimenting with the amount until it fits. She puts on his coat,
gives the sleeves a big cuff. She examines the Colt's dragoon. She drops apples into a
sack.
She finishes by folding a letter she has written and putting it into an envelope.
Throughout, we have been hearing its contents in voice-over:
Mattie is cinching her gear onto Little Blackie. She mounts and rides off as the letter ends:
Tracking toward Rooster's rope bed. A hat is pulled down over the face of the figure
reclining in it. Smoke sifts up from somewhere.
Mattie draws up to the figure with mounting concern. She pulls the hat off. It is the
elderly Chinese grocer.
The grocer reaches a pipe and pulls on it. His manner is dreamy.
The grocer pulls an envelope from underneath his robe and hands it to Mattie. He closes
his eyes and drifts away.
Mattie pulls a scrap of paper from the envelope and reads:
Mattie's jaw tightens. She abruptly crumples the paper.
Mattie gallops down an embankment to a river of some width. At the near-side ferry
station a raft enclosed by railing waits, its guide rope strung across the river. A pilot
idles on the near shore.
On the far shore two small figures, mounted, ascend the opposite bank. Mattie draws up in
front of the ferryman at the edge of the river.
He reaches for the reins of her horse.
The ferryman is leading Little Blackie back up the hill toward the town. Mattie cranes
around to look at the two small figures across the river. They have twisted in their saddles
to look back.
She looks at the dull man's unresponsive back. She twists to look across the river.
The two mounted figures are breaking their look back and resuming their climb up the
bank.
Mattie draws an apple from the bag slung round the saddlehorn and pegs it, hard as she
can, at the ferryman.
It hits him square in the back of the head. He reacts, reaching to his head and dropping the
reins.
Mattie has already leaned forward for the reins and sweeps them back. She saws Little
Blackie around and sends him galloping for the river.
She urges the horse, at the gallop, into the river.
The splashing and shouts have again drawn the attention of the two men across the river.
As the horse goes further into the river its up-and-down gait slows, the water offering
resistance.
The ferryman has run down to the bank. He stoops for a rock and throws it. It misses by a
mile.
Little Blackie leaves riverbottom and starts swimming.
The two men across the river, having twisted to look, now rein their horses round to face
the action. But they do not advance. They rest forearms on pommels and watch.
Little Blackie is being carried downstream as he swims against a swift current.
Little Blackie's head dips as he finds his feet again. He slogs laboriously to what is now
the nearer shore.
The two men up the bank impassively watch.
The horse and Mattie emerge fully from the river, dripping.
Mattie taps heels against Little Blackie's flanks and walks him slowly up the bank. She
stops many yards short of the two men--Rooster and LeBoeuf.
A silent standoff as Little Blackie breathes heavily. The two expressionless men still have
not stirred.
At length:
A long pause.
Rooster licks his lips, thinking.
A heavy silence as Cogburn stares at her.
LeBoeuf looks between the two, waiting for Rooster to take action. Gathering that he will
not, LeBoeuf slides off his horse.
Mattie watches as he walks to Little Blackie, holding up a gentling hand for the horse to
sniff at and nuzzle.
He abruptly swipes the reins with one hand and with the other grabs Mattie's ankle. He
pushes momentarily to unstirrup the foot and then pulls hard, tumbling Mattie to the
ground.
He begins to spank her.
Rooster sits impassively on his horse.
Mattie is struggling and in spite of herself starts to weep. LeBoeuf drags her through the
dirt to a mesquite bush and snaps off a switch.
Mattie, wet and filthy, tries vainly to swat back. Rooster still watches without expression
as LeBoeuf whips the girl.
Finally, quietly:
LeBoeuf looks back, for a moment too surprised to speak. He then regains his resolve:
He returns to the beating.
The sound of a gun being cocked.
LeBoeuf leaves off the beating to stare at Rooster--whose gun is drawn, cocked, and
pointed at him.
LeBoeuf flings the switch aside and stalks to his horse. He mutters, but loud enough to be
heard:
Mattie sits looking into the fire, hands clasped around her knees.
LeBoeuf sits feet to the fire, smoking a pipe that, with his boyish face, makes him look as
if he is playing at professor. He gazes into the fire, musing as he pulls at the pipe.
Rooster enters the circle of light with an armload of wood.
Rooster gazes at LeBoeuf for a beat, then dumps the wood onto the fire.
He leaves the circle of light.
LeBoeuf addresses the darkness that Rooster has disappeared into:
He reenters with a length of rope, and a robe which he unrolls onto the ground.
Rooster plays out one end of the rope to just touch the ground, then starts playing out the
rest as he paces.
He has finished making a loop around his sleeping robe. Seeing this, LeBoeuf laughs.
As he leaves the circle of light:
He reenters with a bottle and settles down on his robe.
LeBoeuf leaps angrily to his feet.
Silence. Crackling fire.
LeBoeuf continues to glare at Rooster, breathing heavily.
Rooster, with a loud flap, whips the robe over himself.
We are close on Mattie's upturned face. Snowflakes are drifting down onto it and
melting. Mattie's eyes blink open.
Rooster is already at his horse, packing it. LeBoeuf is not in evidence.
Mattie rises.
A toss of his head:
Rooster gives a vicious tug on the cinchrope.
Rooster turns to her.
We hear spurs jingling.
LeBoeuf has appeared.
LeBoeuf is already mounting his shaggy horse.
He saws the horse around.
LeBoeuf gallops off with the thunder of hoofs and the jingle of spurs, and Rooster,
seething, turns back to his work.
As the hoofbeats recede, Mattie sounds a note of regret:
A mule is pulling back on a cotton rope round his neck that is tied off to the porch of the
ramshackle store. The beast is strangling as the rope is too tight, and he is being poked
with sticks by two motley-dressed Indian boys up on the porch.
Rooster enters and cuts the rope. The mule brays and canters off, shaking its head, rope
dangling.
Rooster is already mounting the steps to the porch.
He kicks the first youth hard in the ass, sending him sprawling off the porch into the dirt.
The second backs against the railing and Rooster shoves him in the chest so that he flips
backward to also land in the dirt.
Mattie, astride Little Blackie, holds the reins of Cogburn's horse. As he disappears inside
the two youths climb back onto the porch. They sit at the lip, feet dangling, and stare
sullenly at Mattie. She stares back.
The youths have not moved. The door bangs open and Rooster emerges.
Crossing back he kicks one of the boys off the porch into the dirt again. The other youth
scampers out of footreach. Rooster starts down the stairs.
With a ching he flips a coin to Mattie. She inspects it: gold, square, with a +-shaped cut-
out in the middle.
Rooster mounts up.
The youth who was kicked into the dirt is dusting himself off. He has been listening
without interest.
Rooster reins his horse around to go.
Rooster and Mattie ride abreast along a barely defined road.
He frowns and draws up, looking at something. Mattie follows his look.
A man is hanging in a tree--very high, perhaps thirty feet off the ground. The body slowly
twists. The head seems unnaturally large.
At Rooster's shout something separates from the head: we have been looking at not just the
corpse's silhouette but that of a large carrion-eating bird as well, perched on the corpse's
shoulder and feeding at the corpse's face. The bird flaps clumsily off.
Rooster gazes at the strung-up body.
Rooster gets off his horse, pulls a knife from his gear, and ambles to the tree. Mattie
follows.
When she arrives Rooster has started sawing at the rope that ties the body off, wrapped
around a chest-high branch stump. Mattie looks up.
She is looking mostly at soles of feet as the foreshortened body twists slowly, high above.
She does. Rooster steps back as well as the almost-cut-through rope starts to unravel by
itself, crazily twisting under the pressure and gently spinning the body above.
The rope snaps. It yanks violently upward, slapping branches.
The body drops--perhaps four feet--and jerks to a stop, jacknifing and dancing.
They both gaze up at the body.
Mattie is well up.
We hear Rooster's voice from below:
Mattie pauses, looking down.
We are over her. Rooster is foreshortened, a long way down, looking up, smoking a
cigarette. He reacts to her look down:
She looks up, down again, and then proceeds. Rooster continues as well:
Mattie stretches onto tiptoes, reaches, just gets fingers around a branch. She secures it
enough with the one hand to dare to reach with the other. She hauls herself up.
Mattie looks out, at waist-height to the corpse, which twists maybe eight feet away over
the void. Rooster notes her look:
The face is half-eaten and eyeless.
She moves to start back down, but Rooster calls:
She climbs one more branch to arrive at the hanging branch. She shimmies out onto it and
pulls the knife from Rooster's belt now around her waist.
Mattie looks down, over the shoulder of the close-by foreshortened corpse to the far
foreshortened Rooster.
She calls out as she starts sawing:
The sawing continues.
Rooster takes one step back.
The rope snaps. At once:
The body drops.
The branch, unburdened, bucks with Mattie atop it.
She gasps, hugging at the branch, getting swung halfway around it but then righting
herself.
The body hits the ground with a smack.
Mattie looks.
The body is spread out on the ground below, many bones now broken, its posture absurd.
Rooster steps forward. He toes the upper body to get a view of the face. Barely audible:
He reacts to something, looking up the road in the direction of their heading.
Mattie looks out. Partly obscured by intervening foliage, an oncoming rider. His pace is
unhurried.
Down on the ground Rooster turns to face the rider--an Indian with a long-bore rifle
balanced sideways across the pommel of his saddle. He wears a tattered Union Army
jacket, crossed bandoliers of rifle shells and a black homburg hat with a feather in its brim.
Rooster drops his hand to his gun as the rider approaches.
Mattie looks down at the foreshortened rider pulling up under the tree. She hears a
greeting and a mostly inaudible exchange.
After some back-and-forth the Indian dismounts. The men stoop at either end of the
corpse. Rooster grabs wrists, the Indian, ankles. They lift.
Mattie frowns. She starts to move.
Mattie finishes climbing down.
Rooster is just returning from the road to their two horses by the tree. The Indian, with the
corpse slung over the rump of his horse, is resuming his trip in the direction from which
Rooster and Mattie came.
Rooster mounts.
He looks up at the sky as snowflakes start to sift down.
It is snowing lightly. Rooster and Mattie are clomping through a stream.
A distant gunshot.
Rooster stops. He twists to look behind.
A listening beat. At length:
Mattie thinks.
Rooster waits, sitting casually astride his horse in the middle of the road. Snow continues
to fall.
A jingling noise up the road.
Movement: an advancing rider seen through the foliage that masks a bend in the road.
Rooster straightens.
The oncoming rider rounds the bend.
He approaches: a white man with big whiskers, his horse leading a packhorse loaded with
clinking and jangling sundries. Draped on his own horse's rump is the hanged man's
body.
The stranger wears a fierce bear head as hat. The rest of the bearskin trails down his body
as robe.
He advances unhurriedly towards Rooster. At a few yards' distance he draws up, content
to sit his horse and solemnly return Rooster's stare.
At length:
Rooster straightens as if to rein his horse around but stops with a thought:
A pause.
The Bear Man tilts his head to indicate the corpse behind him.
A point-of-view looking down on a thrown-together cabin dug into the flanks of a ravine.
Its roof meets hillside at the rear. Smoke is coming out of a rough chimney.
Rooster and Mattie have paused at the crest of the rise above the dugout to look. Rooster
shrugs out of his coat.
As Mattie descends to where hillside meets structure Rooster takes his rifle and walks
around to the front door--crude planking hung on leather-strap hinges. His footsteps
crunch in the snow.
The door is yanked open, inches, and a backlit face appears over a hand holding a revolver.
Rooster halts.
The door slams.
After a moment the light inside goes out.
Mattie, arriving on the roof, looks steeply down on Rooster. He glances up, thinking. He
does not sign. He looks back at the door.
Rooster looks up at Mattie. He nods.
She balls the jacket and stuffs it into the chimney.
Rooster takes ten paces to one side of the door and then kneels in the snow, raising his
rifle.
Long beat.
Muffled coughs from inside the house--more than one person.
Activity inside--yelling--the hiss of fire being doused. Suddenly:
The door flies open and--BANG! BANG!--two shotgun blasts.
Slightest beat as Mattie peers into the yard, and then--BANG!--shot rips through the
roof just at her feet.
A rifle blast--from Rooster. A yelp of pain from inside.
Rooster cocks his head.
Thinking beat.
Thinking beat.
The door opens again. From the smoky black a shotgun and two revolvers are tossed out.
Then, orange light: a lamp is lit. Two men emerge, one limping and holding onto the
other, who holds high the lamp.
Rooster has coaxed the fire back to life. He peers into the large pot hanging over it.
The cuffed men sit side-by-side on a plank bench behind a plank table, staring at Mattie.
Moon's leg is bound with a large blue handkerchief.
Quincy sounds resentful:
He stirs the pot with a wooden spoon.
Moon nods agreement, but has a different thought:
Rooster, continuing to nose around, pushes the canvas cover off a crate of bottles.
Rooster spoons sofky from the pot into a bowl
Rooster sits across from the men with his bowlful of sofky and starts eating.
Raises a spoonful.
Moon looks at Quincy, who gives a hard look back.
Rooster shrugs at Moon.
He reacts to Mattie, staring at him.
Mattie's look shifts to Moon.
Beat.
Quincy jerks up one knee, banging the bottom of the table and sloshing Rooster's sofky as
he grabs something from his boot: a knife.
He slams it down on Moon's cuffed hand, chopping off four fingers. They fly like chips
from a log.
As Moon screams Rooster mutters:
Quincy flips the knife lightly in the air and regrabs it with blade pointing opposite-wise.
He twists and rears with cuffed hands to plunge the knife into Moon's chest.
Rooster has his gun out now and fires.
Quincy jerks back, hit in the face. Blood spatters Mattie. Quincy, still seated, slides
awkwardly down the wall.
Moon has fallen to the floor, knife in chest.
Rooster and Mattie stand over him.
Eyes wide, he gazes down his body.
Mattie's point-of-view: the dark shoulders of the wooded hills, funneling down to the
ravine. It is all very still except for falling snow.
Mattie stands outside the cabin door, hugging herself, keeping watch.
The door opens and Rooster emerges.
From the threshold he surveys the inside of the cabin.
Something he sees inside prompts Rooster to quickly reenter the cabin. He reemerges, fist
closed on something.
He flings, and whatever he was holding lands faintly pit-a-pat in the woods.
Rooster finishes hunkering down.
He takes out his revolver and put a cartridge into the one empty chamber, under the
hammer. He places the revolver on a log and puts the sack of cartridges next to the
revolver. He leans his rifle against the log. He looks out.
His point-of-view of the cabin below, peaceful, smoke drifting from the chimney.
Rooster takes out a sack of corn dodgers and starts to eat.
Chewing beat.
He is suddenly alert, and raises a hand for quiet.
There is the sound of a rider, approaching slowly.
Rooster is puzzled:
Their high point-of-view: a mounted figure has entered the ravine.
He travels its length and stops his horse before the cabin and dismounts. We hear the
jingle of spurs.
Distant, calling toward the cabin:
LeBoeuf unholsters a gun. He walks to the cabin, opens the door and peers in.
Rooster starts to rise, about to call out, as LeBoeuf enters and closes the door.
We hear hoofbeats. Many horses.
Rooster is looking to the mouth of the ravine.
Mattie follows his look.
Their high point-of-view: four riders just entering the ravine.
They look back to the cabin.
From inside, faintly:
The door opens and LeBoeuf stumbles out, wide-eyed.
He sees the approaching riders. They see him.
They slow, approaching with caution.
LeBoeuf looks at them, glances back over his shoulder, looks forward again.
The riders stop several paces from LeBoeuf. They spread in a line facing him. Words are
exchanged; we cannot make them out.
LeBoeuf unholsters a gun and points it at the four men.
The four men, slouched astride their horses, are not impressed by LeBoeuf's gun. There is
more talking.
He refers to the mounted man who does most of the talking. Lucky Ned now speaks to the
men on either side and the two corners advance, closing a circle around LeBoeuf.
LeBoeuf looks warily from side side, swinging his gun to cover the group. None of the
riders bothers to unholster a gun.
The man to LeBoeuf's right lifts a rope off his saddle and casually twirls it.
The man to his left says something: LeBoeuf looks left and the man to his right drops the
rope around LeBoeuf and pulls it tight. LeBoeuf is jerked off his feet, gun dropping. The
mounted man backs his horse, taking the play from the rope. He dallies the free end round
his saddlehorn.
Two of the men slide off their horses.
One of them heads for the cabin door.
BANG!--the rifleshot, just at Mattie's ear, is deafening.
The man heading to the cabin drops, shot in the back.
The two horses that are now riderless rear and mill, panicked.
The horse towing LeBoeuf also skitters, spooked, as its rider looks wildly about and starts
shooting.
Lucky Ned looks toward our vantage point and also begins firing.
Rooster is methodically aiming and firing but in the commotion below his first couple of
shots don't tell. His third drops Lucky Ned's horse.
The other unmounted man is frantically trying to snatch up the reins of one of the loose
horses.
The man towing LeBoeuf spurs his horse toward one of the free horses, trying to grab it.
LeBoeuf is dragged past plunging horses' hooves.
A cacaphony of screaming horses, crackling gunfire from the basin, and the boom of
Rooster's rifle.
The unmounted man has managed to grab a halter. He climbs with difficulty aboard the
skittish horse.
The rider towing LeBoeuf cuts loose the towline. He gallops toward Ned Pepper with an
arm outstretched to help him aboard.
Rooster is tracking him with his rifle.
Lucky Ned grabs the extended arm. As he begins to swing up there is the BOOM of
Rooster's rifle. The rider pitches off the horse but Lucky Ned manages to stay on, and
swipes up the reins. He gallops off.
The one other surviving horseman follows him.
There is one dead horse in the basin, a live unmounted horse racing crazy circles, and three
still bodies. One is LeBoeuf's.
Rooster rises.
LeBoeuf is moaning.
Rooster walks toward him trailed by Mattie, glancing along the way at the two dead men.
Something is wrong with LeBoeuf's speech. Bloody saliva bubbles copiously from his
mouth.
Rooster stoops to examine.
Rooster slaps lightly down at LeBoeuf's chin, signaling that he should open up.
LeBoeuf does, and Rooster digs in with two dirty fingers, dipping his head to peer in as he
pokes this way and that.
Bloody saliva bubbles out with the word. Rooster withdraws his fingers.
Mattie goes to inspect the two outlaws' corpses as Rooster pokes back LeBoeuf's shirt to
look at the wound.
Falling straight down: a windless night.
We hear a murmuring male voice from inside the cabin.
Mattie is finishing rubbing down her horse.
She puts up the brush and pulls an apple from her apple bag.
The horse chomps up the apple and she rubs its muzzle as it chews.
The horse huffs and blows.
We are raking the four dead men who have been carelessly propped against the outside
wall to sit in an irregular row. Mattie passes them, with a brief look, and opens the door,
and the murmuring voice from inside fans up louder.
As Mattie enters. We see LeBoeuf musing before the fire as he cleans his Sharp's carbine
--an awkward operation given the injury to his shoulder, now bandaged.
All we see of Rooster, seated further from the fire, is a pair of boots, and legs stretching
into darkness.
Mattie goes to the pot of food on the fire.
Rooster is a voice in the darkness:
We hear the pthoonk of a bottle yielding its cork, followed by the pthwa of the cork's
being spit out.
We hear liquid slosh as the bottle is tipped back.
We hear the smack of lips releasing bottleneck, and a wet breath.
Silence.
LeBoeuf shrugs.
Wide: three riders leave the cabin single-file.
Jump in: pushing Mattie, who rides last in line. LeBoeuf is in front of her. Rooster leads,
head tipping momentarily back to swig from a bottle.
He then half-hums, half-scats a tune.
Mattie twists to look behind.
Her point-of-view: pulling away from the cabin, against the wall of which the four dead
men are now semi-drifted over with snow. Rooster's humming has stopped and we hear
his voice:
He launches into another song, interrupted by the slosh of liquid as he takes a drink.
Mattie looks forward again and LeBoeuf turns to look back at her. He keeps his voice low:
Still without looking back, Rooster projects:
He twists around to gaily hector LeBoeuf:
He reins his horse up, hastily tips the bottle to his mouth to make sure it is empty, and then
hurls it high.
He pulls out a navy six-gun and fires.
The bottle reaches the height of its arc untouched, and drops.
Rooster cocks his head at the landed bottle several paces distant. He shoots again and
misses.
He shoots a third time and the bottle shatters.
Rooster starts to dismount, finishing in a semi-controlled fall. He dusts one knee and
reaches into his saddlebag. He pulls out a corn dodger and heaves it up.
He fires. The corn dodger is obliterated.
He reaches two corn dodgers from the saddlebag.
He hurls them and quickly fires twice. Nothing happens; he quickly fires three times at the
falling corn dodgers, missing.
Scowling, he throws a single corn dodger and is just raising his gun when another gun goes
off, making him jump.
LeBoeuf has fired with a gun in his left hand, missing.
He reaches into the saddlebag and hurls it high. Both he and Leboeuf fire. It explodes.
He tosses a corn dodger and fires. It holds to its arc and falls. LeBoeuf is smug.
Rooster roars:
Some time later.
Rooster sways in the saddle, holding a bottle, humming.
He tips his head up and tilts the bottle all the way back, confirming that this one too is now
empty.
Riding forward, he leans out of the saddle, stretching low to one side, his hand extended
with the bottle. Wavering, he places it upon a large rock as he passes.
His arm waves for balance as he straightens but he keeps his place on the horse. He half-
turns, propping himself with one hand on his saddle-back, to address Mattie and LeBoeuf:
Framed by a mine entrance.
Rooster steps into the square, wood-beam frame of the entrance, looking in.
A beat, and he pulls out his six-gun and fires in.
Echoing ricochets.
Wide outside: Rooster before the entrance; Mattie and LeBoeuf standing close by. Very
still.
The little camp is deserted.
Rooster turns to pan the hills.
At length:
Very faint echo.
Faintly, from our distant perspective:
It is raining.
The campfire is roughly canopied by a hide draped at a cant over a pair of tree branches.
Mattie pours hot water from a kettle into a large tin cup holding a corn dodger. She takes a
fork and starts mashing the dodger into mush.
LeBoeuf sits before the fire, coat over his head, one hand on his jaw, which is swollen.
Rooster, bellicose, stumbles to the fire with a few thin branches. As he leans in toward the
fire the water draining off the low edge of the canopy drums onto his neck. He waves a
hand back at it like a man swatting flies.
Rooster sits heavily, a stretching leg kicking away an empty bottle. Rain patters on his hat.
He rises and starts gathering his things.
Rooster erupts:
He whips his robe over himself.
Wide on Mattie, staggering toward us carrying a saddle. We boom down to bring Little
Blackie into the foreground as Mattie takes the last few stumbling steps forward, almost at
a run so as to let her inertia help her heave the saddle up onto the horse's back.
LeBoeuf, cinching a saddle onto his woolly horse, looks around.
He swings himself up onto the horse.
He does, dropping a hand gloved in rough suede. She refuses to take it.
He remains with hand extended. She hesitates, sees there is no give, and reaches for up for
the hand. They shake.
He saws the horse around and sets it to a prancing walk, his spurs jingling.
The sound recedes, leaving behind Rooster's snoring from the campfire.
Rooster's snores bump up at the cut.
Mattie enters, gazes down for a thinking beat at the passed-out lawman, then lies down on
her robe.
She lies still, gazing up.
After a long beat she abruptly rises.
She recedes toward the horses. As she reaches them we hear Little Blackie snort and blow.
Mattie returns with a length of coiled rope. She plays it out in a loop around her robe. She
lies down again. She closes her eyes.
Fade out.
We are high and close on Rooster, asleep. Face mottled red, he looks like hell. He emits a
symphony of respiratory noises as breath fights through layers of phlegm.
Reverse on Mattie, looking down at him.
Wider on the forlorn campsite--Mattie standing, Rooster awkwardly sprawled sleeping,
LeBoeuf gone.
Close on a bucket: Mattie's hand enters to grab it.
We hear rushing water.
Mattie descends, carefully stiff-legged, down a steep slope thick with trees and brush.
She emerges onto the bank of a fast-flowing stream, shallow at this point and loud.
Mattie takes a couple of steps into the water to dip the bucket. Soft, behind her, we see
four horses watering at the opposite bank, just downstream.
Mattie stoops to fill the bucket. Turning as she straightens, she sees the four horses.
Surprised, she drops the bucket and stares.
The horses huff and blow in the water. They are not wild--they wear tack--but there is no
rider in sight, until:
A man straightens and emerges from behind one of the horses. The first thing we notice
about him is the silhouette of the rifle projecting over one shoulder, slung to the man's
back with a piece of sash cord.
He looks at something floating by in the stream: Mattie's bucket. He looks up. We jump
closer:
The man has a black mark on his forehead.
Seeing Mattie, who still gapes at him, he hastily swings his rifle round and trains it on her.
He takes cautious, splashing steps forward.
He grins, relaxing. He slings the rifle back over his shoulder.
Mattie pulls the flour sack from her coat pocket and works carefully at the cord that
cinches it shut. Chaney watches.
Mattie has the cinch loose. She reaches the Colt's Dragoon out of the sack and points it at
Chaney.
Chaney looks at the gun. He grins and puts hands on hips.
Mattie gives a dismayed look at the gun and tries to pull the hammer back. It has a heavy
pull: she struggles, using two thumbs.
Chaney watches, smiling.
She pulls the hammer back further and we hear it notch. She looks up.
Mattie fires.
Chaney, shocked, takes a staggering step back.
Mattie stumbles and falls back under the recoil, into the stream but careful to hold the gun
high and dry. She awkwardly reclaims her footing and retrains the gun. Chaney is looking
down at his bleeding side.
She is struck by a worrying thought. She hastily recocks the gun.
Crashing from the brush up the hill, and a voice:
There is yelling from the other bank now too.
He sloshes suddenly forward, water kicking up before him.
She squeezes the trigger, but the gun dry fires.
Chaney grabs the gun and flings it away, then holds on to Mattie and slaps her.
Two men burst through the brush from Chaney's side of the river. One is in woolly chaps
--Lucky Ned Pepper. The other is taller and dressed almost formally in a linen suit and
string tie and a bear coat. Both men bear Winchester repeating rifles.
Chaney is dragging Mattie to their bank, slapping at her along the way.
Rooster emerges from his side of the riverbank carrying a side arm.
The men exchange fire.
He grabs Mattie from Chaney and keeps her between himself and the far bank as he fires
again.
One hand to his bleeding side, Chaney lunges for the horses' leads.
Rooster has retreated back to the tree cover, as has the well dressed man on our side.
Intermittent gunshots and the panicked neighing of horses. Lucky Ned falls back into the
trees with Mattie and starts pulling her up the steep hill.
Chaney follows pulling the string of horses. He is breathing hard and blood stains the front
of his shirt.
He twists Mattie around to face him and we see him clearly for the first time. Part of his
upper lip and three of his front teeth are missing.
Lucky Ned throws Mattie to the ground. He puts a muddy boot on her neck.
Mattie manages to choke out:
Silence.
A short beat, through which we hear only the rush of riverwater. Then, Rooster's voice
again:
He breaks open his rifle and starts to reload.
He pulls Mattie to her feet. Rooster's voice trails away:
Lucky Ned gives Mattie a rough push.
Mattie advances, Lucky Ned giving periodic shoves from behind.
A stout young man with a shotgun leaps out from behind a slab of limestone in front of
them. He has a round face and idiot eyes.
He makes loud turkey-gobbling noises at Mattie.
Though Mattie is startled Lucky Ned does not immediately react, but he does finally tire of
the turkey noises:
The idiot makes a pig-squealing sound in acknowledgment and then falls quiet, loping
alongside Mattie and Lucky Ned.
Lucky Ned is grim:
They are ascending out of the trees onto a bare rock ledge not quite at the crest of the
mountain. The rock floor is uneven and broken by fissures and holes. A cave-like setback
at the far end of the rock shelf is half-curtained with a hide. A rough camp.
A cookfire burns on the open rock. Two coffeepots warm leaning against the inside of the
fire's piled-stone perimeter. A skillet holds bacon.
A man squats at the fire, holding a piece of bacon, turned to watch Lucky Ned and Mattie's
approach. He wears a filthy Union army uniform with officer's boards. His mouth is an 0
of surprise.
Tom Chaney has reached the rock ledge and he charges Mattie with a yell.
Lucky Ned knocks him aside.
Chaney, squatting with his shirt pulled up for the ex-soldier to work on his wound, now
rises.
Chaney turns to Lucky Ned who has a spyglass to his eye, scanning a ridge across the
river.
Lucky Ned speaks quietly, without lowering the glass:
From somewhere in the woods below we hear the idiot's gobbling noises.
The voice of the well dressed man floats up from the woods:
Mattie looks at Chaney moaning in pain as the ex-soldier works on his side.
Lucky Ned replies absently, still gazing out:
He sees something and hastily raises the glass.
A horseman is ascending the treeless ridge across the river with a riderless horse--Little
Blackie--in tow. At the top he pauses and turns, and draws a revolver from his saddle and
points it skyward. We see the gun kick and breathe gunsmoke. A second later we hear the
shot.
Lucky Ned lowers the glass and takes a gun and shoots skyward. He raises the glass
again.
The horseman turns away and proceeds on over the crest. He is gone.
Lucky Ned turns to Mattie. He comes and squats at the fire.
The well dressed man and the idiot trudge up from the woods onto the rock ledge.
The man in the dirty uniform continues to perform crude field surgery on Chaney, digging
into his side with a knife to extract the bullet. As Chaney moans the idiot makes calf-
bawling noises in imitation.
Lucky Ned turns back to Mattie.
The idiot is still bawling. Chaney grabs a stone and flings it at him and the idiot scampers
back, making goat noises. Chaney grabs, moaning, at the wound aggravated by this fresh
exertion.
The man in officer's boards laughs.
Lucky Ned straightens from the fire and begins to collect his meager belongings. The
other men follow suit.
Chaney stares at Lucky Ned. His gaze then swings to the idiot.
The men, clanking with gear, cross the rock ledge and descend into the woods.
In the quiet, Chaney is disconsolate.
We faintly hear the rest of his party mount up and gallop off. Chaney drops heavily before
the fire to sit staring.
A silent beat.
Chaney continues to stare silently into the fire.
More brooding silence.
Chaney rises, glaring at her.
He is striding toward her. She backs toward the ledge.
Without breaking stride he plows into her, good hand raised to catch her by the throat.
She tumbles backward, Chaney on top of her sweating and snarling.
On her back Mattie struggles, but Chaney, straddling her, has her pinned. His good hand is
still on her throat. She claws at it.
He swats her with his free hand. Her clawing stops.
Chaney is wincing from the swing of his own arm. As he leans over her his opened wound
dribbles blood onto Mattie along with his sweat.
He reaches back awkwardly toward his calf with his bad hand, groaning with the stretch.
We hear the schlick of steel and his hand reappears holding a knife taken from a leg sheath.
He pushes against the underside of Mattie's chin, stretching her neck.
Her eyes roll down in their sockets to watch as Chaney regrips the knife and lowers it to
her throat, his knuckles whitening with tension.
Whack--a rifle stock swings into frame, connecting with Chaney's head. His head snaps
to one side and then lolls back as he slowly straightens, ropey drool and blood pouring
from his mouth. He sways briefly and then collapses onto Mattie.
A hand enters to pull him off. Mattie blearily props herself on her elbows.
LeBoeuf is panting and sweating from his climb. He gazes down at Chaney. Once he has
breath:
LeBoeuf's look breaks from Chaney. He pulls his pipe from his pocket and lights it.
He crosses the rock ledge.
He skirts the large hole and reaches the shelf's far lip and gazes out. Before him is a steep
drop-off. We see the very crowns of near pines and then, four hundred yards away, the
land flattening to an open meadow.
Mattie, also gazing out, comes up beside LeBoeuf.
LeBoeuf points with his pipe.
Lucky Ned, the Parmalees, and the Doctor are just entering the low meadow, riding away.
As they do so Rooster enters at the far side, facing. He draws one of his navy sixes as he
advances.
Leboeuf shrugs.
He and Mattie both watch as, below, the parties advance on each other at a walk. Eighty
yards separating them, they halt.
Rooster and Lucky Ned eye each other. After a beat:
Rooster nods.
A beat.
Ned Pepper laughs.
He puts the reins in his teeth, grabs his other revolver with the hand now free, and spurs his
horse.
Mattie watches him charge.
The facing four charge to meet him.
Over the distant laughter of the idiot, the crackle of gunfire commences.
Rooster turns his head to either side as he fires, bringing his good eye into play.
The idiot is gaily waving a revolver over his head, not firing, squawking like a chicken as
he charges.
A shot from Rooster kills him and swipes him neatly off his horse.
Farrel Parmalee has a shotgun. It roars.
Shot peppers Rooster. He returns fire.
Farrel Parmalee's horse is hit. It stumbles, and Farrel is dashed forward, snapping his
neck.
The Doctor Indian-rides past, sliding down and hooking an ankle on his saddle so that he
may ride in the cover of his horse's body. He makes for the treeline on the far side of the
meadow.
Rooster and Lucky Ned are charging each other, both firing.
They pass each other--both still mounted--but Rooster's horse has been hit and it falls,
pinning Rooster's leg. His guns are gone, lost in the fall.
Rooster, bleeding from sprayed shot in neck, face, and shoulder, struggles and unpins his
leg.
LeBoeuf sits cross-legged and brings the butt of his Sharp's carbine to rest against his
injured shoulder. He nudges the gunstock back and forth, looking for the anchor that will
cause him the least pain. He cocks his head to sight, puffing pipesmoke.
Lucky Ned is reining his horse around with his left hand. His right arm dangles. He walks
his horse toward Rooster, who is getting to his feet.
He drops the reins to reach out a gun with his one working arm.
LeBoeuf, sighting.
He squeezes the trigger.
He screams as the gun roars and bucks back into his shoulder.
Rooster is facing Lucky Ned.
Lucky Ned raises his gun at Rooster and--is shot in the chest.
As we hear the weakly distant guncrack Ned flops backward, slides halfway down one side
of the saddle, and dangles, briefly, foot tangled in a stirrup, horse standing unperturbed.
Then, he drops.
Mattie whoops as LeBoeuf groans.
LeBoeuf sets the rifle down and gropes at his shoulder.
A rock is brought down on his head by Tom Chaney.
Mattie screams.
LeBoeuf has collapsed and is motionless. Chaney drops the rock and stoops for the rifle.
Mattie is already dragging it away. She grabs it up.
Chaney stands nearly straight--as much as his injuries will allow, and--
Boom!--the blast catches Chaney in the chest and he is blown back off the ledge, looking
surprised. He falls to oblivion.
But the carbine recoil pushes Mattie stumbling back and this, with the bad footing at the lip
of the pit behind her, sends her falling.
Mattie is tumbling. She bounces down a very steep slope, disturbed earth tumbling with
her, protruding roots and slender upgrowing foliage slapping at her on her descent.
As she descends more or less feet-first something snags an ankle and her inertia sends her
upper body on down past the pinned leg. She jerks to a halt head-downmost on the steep
slope.
The patter of falling dirt subsides. Silence. Heavy breathing.
Mattie, lying face-up, does a painful half sit-up to look around.
Above her, her left foot is snarled through some roots. Well beyond, very high, weak light
defines the mouth of the pit.
Using her elbows she pivots, scooting her upper body uphill so that she is no longer below
her foot. She reaches the cuff of her pants on the trapped leg and pulls it up to expose the
shin.
A splinter of broken bone has punctured the skin.
She pulls the cuff back down.
She stretches to slip fingers between her boot and the roots in which it is fouled. She just
manages to work in two fingers; in wrenching around, the root has cinched tight. She tugs
feebly at the root, which shows no signs of give.
She looks back up.
The small hole of weak daylight, dust drifting up toward it.
No answer.
Arms tiring, she lays back again against earth. She looks around.
Partway round the pit, just at her level, something difficult to discern in the semi-dark: two
mirroring shapes, close to each other: is it the soles of a pair of boots?
Mattie squints. She props herself partway up.
Higher view: they are boots--worn by a corpse--stretching away from us, foreshortened.
The man's skull has been partly shattered by the protruding rock against which it rests.
Mattie surveys the body. Her attention is caught by something:
The skeletal remains are still clothed and there seems to be something held by a bandolier
strapped across the chest, over the body's decomposing blue shirt but beneath a tattered
vest. A sheath is just visible high on the strap, near the corpse's shoulder. The butt-end of
a knife juts out.
Mattie stretches, reaching.
She can just get to a boot.
She pulls.
The man's remains seem to be fairly light. They drag across earth, raising dust, tending to
slide away with the grade of the pit.
Mattie reels the body in, careful not to let go and lose it down the hill. She pulls shoe,
pants cuff, pants knee, belt. The bandolier is close.
Her fingers curl around shirt, and pull.
The shirt's buttons softly pop and fiber dust drifts up as the fabric falls to pieces. Rib cage
is exposed beneath.
Mattie hastily reaches and curls fingers around ribs. She pulls. She is about to get the
knife when--
A glistening something inside the rib cage--guts?--starts to slowly move. But it can't be
guts: it is gliding, coiling, under its own power.
A faint rattle.
Mattie screams as the ball of waking snakes quickens. One snake starts to slowly emerge,
and she bats the body away.
She pushes and kicks with her free leg, as much as her pinned attitude will allow. The
body, coming to pieces, slides dustily down into the dark. It disappears. Fiber and bone
dust float up toward us. We hear rattles.
Mattie hastily reaches for the root that pins her and in a panic pulls, looking back
toward the body. The root holds fast.
A snake is sluggishly and sinuously weaving up the earth toward her. She muscles her
body upward so that once again her pinned leg is bottom-most.
Another snake is behind the first. . . several more behind that.
As the snakes advance to the level of her pinned leg Mattie freezes. The first snake
continues climbing, weaving up the slope alongside Mattie's body. She watches it come
on, its blunted head with its flicking tongue inches from her face. The head passes, the
body goes coiling by.
Another snake undulates onto her pinned leg.
Careful to keep still, eyes on the advancing snakes:
More snakes climb onto her.
A large snake is winding onto her shoulder. She gingerly places a hand for it to coil onto;
it does; she holds it at arms length and gently shakes it off.
Rooster appears in the mouth of the pit. He has a rope wrapped round his waist and he
starts to descend, half walking, half hopping against the pit wall.
Mattie winces and looks down at one hand.
A small snake wrapped round her wrist has its fangs in the meat of the hand.
She flaps her hand and the snake plops off.
BAM!--a burst of orange as Rooster, descended to the level of the lead snakes, starts firing
his revolver.
BAM! BAM! More orange lightning flashes.
Lively rattling.
The pit fills with roiling gunsmoke.
Rooster starts to stomp as well as fire. He kicks the more sluggish specimens toward the
bottom of the pit.
He reaches Mattie and takes out a knife.
She shows her hand and he makes two slices in the flesh and squeezes out blood. As he
does so:
Rooster stoops with the knife and one slice frees the booted foot. He wraps one arm
around Mattie's waist and tips his head back and bellows:
The rope tautens and starts pulling, Rooster helping with his feet.
Little Blackie, led by a wobbly LeBoeuf, finishes pulling Rooster and Mattie from the pit.
Rooster is already unwrapping the rope from his waist and talking to LeBoeuf as he and
Mattie emerge:
Rooster heaves her up onto the back of Little Blackie, LeBoeuf helping though blood still
flows down one side of his face.
He swings up behind her and nods down to LeBoeuf.
Rooster reins the horse around and spurs it. LeBouef shouts after:
The horse takes to the steep slope reluctantly, with stiff legs, Rooster kicking it on. Tree
branches slap at him and take his hat. His face, already peppered with shot, gets new
scratches.
Mattie is woozy. As Little Blackie crosses the field at full gallop Mattie looks blearily at
the littering bodies of horses and men.
Next to Lucky Ned's body his horse, saddled and riderless, swings its head to watch as
Rooster and Mattie pass.
Mattie's eyes are closing.
Mattie's eyes half-open.
Little Blackie plunges on, through a rough road in woods, but slower now, his mouth
foaming.
Horrible noises are indeed coming from the horse, but Rooster is grim:
He leaves off whipping the horse and takes out his knife. He leans back and slashes at the
horse's whithers. Little Blackie surges.
Mattie screams.
A locked-down shot as horse and riders enter at a gallop and recede.
It has started to snow.
Mattie is flushed and soaked with sweat.
The horse is laboring for breath.
Rooster gives inarticulate curses as he kicks it on.
Mattie looks ahead:
Barely visible in the moonlight a man mounted bareback rides on ahead. A sash cord
holds a rifle to his back.
He recedes, outpacing us, disappearing into the darkness and the falling snow.
Mattie is falling. It is unclear why.
Her legs squeeze the horses flanks.
Her hand tightens on the horses mane.
Rooster's arm reaches around to hold her.
Little Blackie is giving out, going to his knees and then all the way down.
Rooster hangs on to Mattie as the horse sinks. He pulls her clear, lays her on the ground,
and then steps away from her, taking out a gun.
The horrible noises coming from the horse end with a gunshot. Rooster reenters to pick up
Mattie but she screams at him and claws at his face, opening fresh gashes.
He ducks his head as best he can to avoid the claws but that is the extent of his reaction.
He presents his back and she relents, clasping her arms. He rises with a pained wheeze and
he starts jogging with Mattie piggie-back.
Bouncing at his shoulder, she twists to look back.
In the dark, the darker shape of the dead horse, growing smaller.
Mattie turns forward again, eyes drooping.
Rooster is loudly wheezing as he carries Mattie before him now, his jog slowed to an
unsteady walk. Her eyes are opening again.
They are now on a proper dirt road. Rooster staggers around a turn and does a barely
controlled stumble to his knees, and then sits heavily back, Mattie in his lap.
Up ahead is the front porch of Bagby's store, the building dark.
Rooster sits gasping.
Mattie's voice is thick:
Rooster takes out his gun, weakly raises his arm, and fires into the air. He sits panting.
The door of the distant store opens and someone emerges, holding a lamp, peering out into
the dark.
We are looking into the window of a moving train. Looking out past us is a thin forty-
year-old woman.
Reflected in the window is a sizable railyard and then, as the train slows, a station.
Reading backward in the mirror of the window is the station stop: MEMPHIS.
We hear the voice, familiar from the opening of the movie, of the grown Mattie Ross:
As the train eases to a stop the woman, Mattie, steps down. One sleeve of her dress is
pinned up.
Mattie goes along the platform, holding a small bag in one hand and, crushed against its
handle, a flier.
In the scene, Mattie calls peremptorily to a young boy on the platform:
She shows him the flier:
The boy looks up and points.
Mattie crosses the platform and further along, descends to the railyard.
The cars of the Wild West Show are parked along a siding. They display gaudily painted
scenes of men on rearing horses firing six-guns, of conestoga wagons, war-bonneted
Indians, bandana-wearing bad men. Three featured performers have their own vignetted
scenes, each depicted as a youngish man engaged in Wild West hell-raising, each with his
name painted beneath: Cole Younger, Frank James, and (unrecognizable but for the
eyepatch) Rooster Cogburn. Below Rooster's name is the sublegend "He rode with
Quantrill! He rode for Parker!"
Around the rail cars cowboys--and some Indians--mill, more wobegone than their painted
representations.
Mattie asks someone along the way for directions and is pointed toward the rear of the
train.
Mattie speaks to two men who sit on the rear platform of the rear car. They are old men
drinking Coca-Colas. One doffs his hat and rises when Mattie addresses the pair; the other
stays seated, slurping from his bottle.
As she turns to go she addresses Frank James, who has been staring at her:
Elsewhere; later.
Men load in a muddy pine coffin. Chalked on the coffin top:
The boxcar door is slammed and the train starts to move off.
Mattie stands with a prayer book. There is a light, lazy fall of snow.
She leaves, striding purposefully past the headstone.
We show the headstone and, beyond, her receding figure.
Her figure softens as it recedes.

TOWARD CAMERA along the tracks. In CLOSE F.G. is.the back
part of a sign.
To most of America in 1913, the Age
of Innocence had arrived and the
stories of the Indian Wars and the
Gold.RuSh and the Great Gunfighters
had become either barroom ballyhoo
or front-porch remiraiscences... .But
on both sides of the $io Grande men
and 1 80's -- unchanged. men in a
changing land.
THEY WEAR THE KHAKI UNIFORMS OF THE UNITED STATES CnVALJRY..
The horses bear the government brand and the saddles are
regulation.
PIKE BISHOP,. wearing lieutenant's bars, rides slightly ahead
of the others. He rides stiffly; always slightly in pain...
Pike is a not unhandsome, leather-faced man in his early
forties. A thoughtful, self-educated top gun with a penchant
for violence who is afraid of nothing - except the. changes
in himself and those around him.
Make no mistake, Pike Bishop is not a hero -- his values are
not ours -- he is a gunfighter, a criminal, a bank. robber, a
killer of men. His sympathies are not for fences, for
trolleys.and telegraphs or better schools. He lives outside
and against society because he believes in that way of life
and if he has moments of sympathy for others, moments of
regret, t hey ' are short lived. He is not a 'good man'
according to the righteous... To them he is totally bad,
and he wouldn't have it any other way.
Next to him DUTCH ENGSTROM wears the uniform of a sergeant.
Dutch is bigaz good-natured with a fast gun hand, strong
loyalty and, like Pike, a bone deep distaste for rules and
regulations. He can sing,. has more than his share of charm,
but believes in nothing except two men, and Pike is one.
Behind them ride two brothers, LYLE and TECTOR GORCH,
dressed as corporals. Lyle and Tector are big, tough, hot
tempered and sudden. They work together, eat together and
sometimes sleep together with the same whore. Brutal,
vicious in a fight, illiterate,. they are always pressing
for an advantage and once they get it -- they never let go.
They are without loyalty or honor, to anyone except each
other and that is limited.
A fifth man wears the single stripe of a PFC. This is. AL'GEL.
Angel is a good-looking, bilingual Mexican boy in his middle
20's who has seen so much blood and violence and cruelty
under Diaz that he rebelled -- but his rebellion was not with
Villa or Obregon, his was a one-man revolution against them
all. He believes in his family, his village and the inherent
dignity of. man (some men at least). " He is faster than his
companions with a gun -- and a better shot -- but he can't.
laugh at the loss of love or suffer the loss of pride --
Mexican pride - a pride that can kill him, but if it does,.
he will have no regrets.
REACHING THE SIGN THE MEN STOP. Witut.speaking they, begin
to brush off their clothing and get their uniforms in order.
PIKE' AND ' DUTCH STARE FOR A MOMENT AT THE SIGN, slightly
bemused. _
Make you feel welcome?
It helps..
What's it say?
(baiting him)
It invites us to stay with the community
and grow. It is here, perhaps with time
and small miracle -- that you could be
taught to read.
Tector looks at Angel for a long moment, then turns to Pike.
I never enlisted to serve with no
smart-mouthed kid.
Nor I with dogs.
(grinning at Pike)
ranks.
(t0 Teotor and Angel)
Itll transfer both of you -- just one
more word.
They look at him silently. He means it. Finally Tike spurs
his horse and the group sta'ts for town, CAMERA PANNING. THEM
PAST. THE STATt.ON Ai12M BOXCARS into a side street.
with weekend visitors. Men,. women and children are. milling
about, shopping and idly trading gossip.. The town.has the
look of turn of the century Americana along with its.Spanisn
heritage. The group of soldiers enter almost unnoticed.-
Riding downethe street they pass:
A LARGE TENT IN FRONT OF WHICH IS A BANNER ANNOUNCING a
W.C.T.U. meeting, which, according to the SOUNDS of the bass
drum and a sermon denouncing rum, is presently going on
inside.
Leviticus. 10.9. Do not drink wine or
strong drink thou,nor thy sons with
thee least ye die. It shall be a
statute forever. Look. not though. upon.
the. wine when it. is red when it giveth
his color in the cup when it moveth
itself aright at the last it biteth
like a serpent and stingeth like an
adder.
That is in the good book.. but here in
this town, it is five cents a glass.
Five cents a glass, does anyone think
that that is really the price of a
----drink? The price of a drink let him
decide who has lost his courage and his
pride and who lies a govelling heap
of clay not far removed from a beast
today.-
I hereby solemnly procaise, God helping
me, to abstain from all di stilled, fer-
mented and malt ligi34rs3 including wine,
beer and cider, and to employ all proper
means to discourage the Ilse of and.
traffic in the same.
ABE,. PHIL AND BURT, at the hitching rail on one side of the
street,. turn and keep pace with the group on horseback.
THE YELLOW AND BROWN RAILROAD ADMINISTRATION BUILDING. As
they swing out of the saddle the other ' soldiers' join them.
1l.' PIKE AND HIS COMPANIONS REMOVE EMPTY SADDLE BAGS FROM their
horses and step onto the boardwalk or sidewalk that surrounds
the'square. Some passersby look curiously.
(after a moment, a little
Fall in -- and follow me.
The men,. with the 'exception of Tector, Phil and Abe, shuffle
into a ragged column of twos.
12. PIKE MOVES DOWN THE FILE, looks around.
14. PIKE PAUSES. FOR A MINUTE and behind him the men surreptitious-
ly touch their holstered forty-five automatics. Pike leaves
the boardwalk, crossing toward. the railroad office. Tector
and Phil stay with the horses.
(removing his hat)
Beg pardon, Ma'am.
(as she stops)
Let. me, Ma'am.
Dutch picks up the package, Pike offers the lady his arm.
She hesitates, accepts. Pike and Dutch, followed by the
others, lead her across the 'street.
THE CROWD BELOW, THEIR RIFLES AT THEIR SIDES Behind them.
on the flat of the roof are open bedrolls, and the remains of
at least three meals. It is hot., they have been there a -long
time, and they are tired.
HARDCASES -- frowns a little as he watches the soldiers in
the street below. It is. hotter than hell on the tin roof and
he is sweating heavily. He turns, edges forward, then nudges:
18, DEKE THORNTON SITTING NEXT TO HIM, his back against the wall,
Thornton is a hard-bodied, quiet-spoken man, with a lined
face and the embittered manner of someone who has changed
sides to stay alive and while part of his life has gone out
of him with the change, the personal integrity by which he
has lived is still. intact.
little.
(after a long moment)
He's there.
The bounty hunters react and prepare to fire. Over this shot
is the sound of Pike calling to Thornton -- from the past.
19 PIKE REACHES THE DOOR AND WITHOUT PAUSING, murmurs 'goodbye'
to the lady and enters, followed by the others,
20 ON THE ROOF, HARRIGAN WHIRLS ON HIS MEN as they begin aim-
aing, ready to fire..
Hold your fire; -- We wait till they come
out -- catch them in the act.
20A THORNTON, WRISTS LASHED TO THE BARS OF THE CELL'S window,
is being whipped by a guard.
20B THORNTON on the rock pile is making little ones of big ones.
.standing by the horses.
I can nail himl
He said wait.
What if they go.out back?
It's covered, you two-bit rednecked peckerwood.
The men settle slightly. Thornton remains tense -- then turns as:
What -you meant to do does not interest
me What you did --
Then, seeing:
24 PIES AND THE OTHERS waiting, he steps to the ody window,
smiling with the thought that their visit means. military
business for the railroad. His mood. changes as the men draw
their\guns and Pike steps towards him.
(reaching for air)
What is it?...What do you want?
25 DUTCH., LYLE AND THE. OTHER MEN SWIFTLY MOVE behind the
counter. Pike ignores the paymaster and turns to:
26 CRAZY LEE STRINGFELLOW,. a young, compulsive killer with just
tip!)
pump shotgun angled up at:
HATCHET-FACED HARRIDAN IN HER FIFTIES i,iho enters the office
carrying. a.wrapped package and is instantly shoved into. a
corner with the other prisoners.
28 ON THE STREET -- THE W.C.T.U. BASS DRUM BOOMS CLOSER as the
parade picks up kids and other scoffing supporters as it
moves around the square. . People and their children are
crowding through the trees to the boardwalk to watch the band.
and group of believers following the_,. in a formation that is
almost as rigid as. their song and their faces.
Damn them!
The parade moves toward the saloon.
They should have been told:
Told-what!? Sus t how. long do you think
anyone in this manure pile can keep his
mouth shut?
Before Thornton can answer:
30 T..C.. SHIFTS TO CHANGE POSITION and his hand. touches the tin
roof, ,causing him to.yelp with pain.. The others snap a look
in his. direction, then freeze as:
31 'VECTOR ON THE BOARDWALK. LOOKS UP,. SEES NOTHING, leans back
against a rail watching the horses and the hymn singers.
After a moment, he smiles a little, beating time,. as he
remembers some forgotten march he watched from his daddy's
shoulders.
FROM THE PARADE GROWS LOUDER. He looks out Behind hi::
3.3 PIKE AND THE OTHERS ARE LOADING SACKS OF SILVER into their
saddle bags. They are almost ready to. leave.
The paymaster, his assistants and the customer, their hands
still up, watch C.L.
Trash -- Filthy trash!
(gently.)
You just. hush now --
People marching and singing coming
down the street -- going to pass near
the horses.
Well, we'll just join in.
Angel, turning away, hesitates, looking up through the window
Waiting for us
Son of a bitch
He turns and crosses quickly to the back door. Dutch
follows. Pike opens it a little, looks ou.t at.
HATS -- they are surrounded. -
37 IN THE OFFICE -- DUTCH JOINS PIKE AT THE DOOR and looks out,
then curses softly.
How in hell could they have known
we were coming?
How in hell do I know?
Where do we go?
Out front -- that's where the horses
are..
He shuts the door, crosses toward the paymaster.
-Besides, when I travel, I like my feet
to dangle.
(indicating the prisoners)
I kill 'em-now?
(after a moment)
No. You just hold them here and wait
as long as you can -- after the shooting
starts.
111-1 hold 'am till hell freezes over
or you say different !
Pike, pushing the frightened paymaster in front of him,
hesitates., looks. at C.L., then continues to . the door, grabs
the handle, looks back again.
39 DUTCH, ANGEL AND THE OTHERS look at Pike. They are ready.
40 PIKE JERKS OPEN THE DOOR,. KICKS THE terrified paymaster out
into the street.
MIDST OF THE BAND,. screaming as the gunfire cuts him down.
The marchers are frozen for a brief instant, then scatter in
terror as:
THE ROOF. -- RTJNNING TO THEIR HORSES. through the' screaming,
terrified marchers.
INTO THE OFFICE. The sound of the band is drowned out by
gunfire and screams. C.L. frowns a little.
They was playing "Gather at the
River." You know that one?
(as they quickly nod assent)
Then sing it Z
AND THEY DO, ALL OF THEM, THEIR VOICES RISING. WITH FERVOR and
C.L. joins them, marching up and down,. waving the shotgun in
time to the music.
COVER, some collide with the bandits,. some hit by the cross-
fire fall wounded in the dusty road.
falling.to the street. below as.
ANGEL AND LYLE BOTH FIRING rapidly, almost simultaneously,
kill. one. man and then another. Two others are wounded by
the bandits' fire.
BANDITS MOUNT their plunging horses.
THORNTON TENSES, RECOGNIZING PIKE. He hesitates, then lifts
his gun to fire.
HESITATES, recognizes Deke, then snaps off a shot which
misses Thornton and kills SHEP, a bounty hunter firing
beside him. Thornton fires and:
is hit and falls into the street..
THE WILD BUNCH SWING ONTO THEIR HORSES AND WHEEL them around, I
but two are hit, Burt is barely able to control his hors 1,
theother , Abe , dies with his animal
PIKE MOUNTS AND GALLOPS HEADLONG INTO THE FRANTIC CROWD, some.
of his men. following, others splitting off in different
directions.. Behind them,. two lie dead in the street.
stops, looks out a the window, laughs with delight at the
excitement, turns:.
He-lifts his shotgun, yells for them to halt.
56 IN THE STREET - FRANK, WOUNDED EARLIER, FALLS FROi HI S
HORSE, dumping his laden saddle bags. His. foot hangs in the
stirrup and his horse drags him after the others. The horse
is shot and goes down -- Frank struggles to his feet, is out
down as:
then spurs through the crowd, past Frank and into the tent.
Horse, man and tent go down in a cloud of dust and canvas.
Then, the horse,. Dutch still in the saddle, rises, breaks
clear and races away.
58. A WOMAN, 'BLIND WITH TERROR, SPINS TO THE GROUND as she runs
into Pike I s horse as it slides to: a halt as Pike a turns to
help Dutch.
A TERRIFIED CHILD STANDS and holds its ears, screaming as the
horses thunder past.
61 HARRIGAN AND THORNTON. AS THEY TRY TO STOP THEM, KICKnr G T-B:'IR
fight them off and. keep firing.
ride for the edge of town.
63 ON ANOTHER STREET A CITIZEN AIMS A PISTOL AND FIRES. The
shot hits'. I
61 BURT'S HORSE, CAUSING THE ANIMAL TO CAREEN WILDLY. It
the glass window of a store.
67 THE BIRDSHOT CATCHES BUCK IN THE FACE,.:: BLINDING HIM... He
68 LYIE. GORCH KILLS THE BOY WITH ONE SHOT- .. and rides on.
69 BUCK HANGS DESPERATELY ONTO THE HORN as- his horse follows the
others.
70 ON THE ROOF -- THO RNTON AND HARRIGAN FINALLY FORCE the bounty
hunters to cease firing after the wild bunch.
PULLS UP HIS HORSE AND WHEELS around to see if they are being
followed, kicking loose a lady's shawl tangled in his stirrup.
72 NOBODY IS FOLLOWING - NOT YET.. Pike spurs his horse and
(The six bandits remaining are Pike, Dutch, the Gorch
brothers, Angel and Buck, now blinded..)-.
73- THE CARNAGE LEFT BY THE GtJNFI IT
WOMEN AND CHILDREN are sobbing hysterically while townspeople
move among the dead and dying, ineptly trying to help.
78 THORNTON MOVES SLOWLY BEHIND THEM, cursing. softly as he.
watches the men rush to bodies like a. puck of wild. dogs in
a gut wagon -- they smell. blood and have forgotten the leash..
79 COFFER AND THE SOUTHERNER,. T.C. NASH, are stripping the
pockets of one body while arguing over whose shot killed the
man. Harrigan runs toward them.
Well, just dig it out and see. if it
ain't my,... 06 S
(pointing to the paymaster)
You stupid damn fools! ... How could you
shoot this employee and let the others
get away?
I didn't shoot that old. boy...-My first
shot killed this man. right here.
(overlapping, crossing
to another body)
He's lying'. Him and them others was
shootin' that old 'employee' full of
holes while I was droppin' this bandit
and them others too -- I must've killed
all three of 'em, sir, while --
Maybe we all did.
(crossing to him)
But by God the next time you plan
your massacre a little more carefully
...or I'll begin it with you!
You'll begin a trip back to Yuma Prison
if you don't learn to keep your mouth
shut l Why - in hell didn't you kill Pike
when you had the chance?
But Thornton doesn't answer -- he turns, listening to:
"Shall we gather at the river
Where bright angels rise and fall
Shall we gather at the river
When the work's all done next fall?"
BY SIMPKINS (the town marshal and trombonist in the W. C.T.U.
band), FRAY, his deputy, and the bounty hunters.
82 THO.RNTON FIRES AND C.L. STAGGERS, falls to one knee,. the
surprise.
Well, how'd you like to kiss my sister's
black cat's ass.
Harrigan fires. C.L. slumps, goes down on the other knee.
More bounty hunters burst into the room.
with bullets.
84 BUT HE TAKES THE MARSHAL, the deputy and one bounty hunter
85 HARRIGAN AND THORNTON LOOKING DOWN at the shambles in the
room, turn as:
AND IRATE TOWNSPEOPLE. BENSON, a beefy redneck rancher,
curses bitterly as he crosses to Harrigan.
We're holding you -- your whole damned rail-
road responsible for this carnage --
Mr. Benson...o
(almost screaming)
Innocent people are dead ...women
mangled -- dying --because you used
our town as a battlefield; You're
going to pay, sir -- your-railroad
is going to pay for our blood;
(blowing up)
Without the railroad this place would
still be a lousy little pueblo, so
don't make any threats to me;
(topping him)
You can't ambush innocent people. on
our street!
We were preventing a robbery and.attempt-
ing to capture a band of outlaws...
You lured that gang in here... the rail-
roadts been blabbing about a big silver
payload for weeks;
We represent the law!
MORE IRATE CITIZENS BURST INTO THE OFFICE. Thornton moves
through them-out the door.
88 IN THE STREET -- HE STOPS, looking at the dead and dying,
----your hired killers..
I can. assure you that there won't be
any more trouble... . My men will follow --
(cutting him off)
Your men enter this town again and
they will be shot on sight;
Thornton ignores them, slowly rolling a cigarette, looking
after Pike.
Harrigan exits, crosses to Thornton.
I pulled. you out of jail to get- that
bunch -- and you failed --
You gave the ordersl If you want the
job done right -- you keep the hell
out of it next time - You and the
rest of your railroad trash" I'll do
it -- but my way. - -
What.makes you think there'll be a
next time for you? What makes you
think you're not going back behind
bars for twenty more years?
Thornton's face twists as he hears again the clanging of cell
doors and the whimpering of prisoners..
Because I'm all you've got
(then, softly)
Because I know him.
(turning away bitterly)
Because you know I'll get him -- I'll
kill him rather than go-back.
90 REACHING THE BOTTOM OF THE ARROYO THE MEN SPUR their horses
side.
turns as:
93 ANGEL PULLS UP and calls to Pike.
Fijate.
94 BUCK, ON HIS HANDS AND KNEES, MOANS WITH PAIN as he attempts
to crawl up the slope.
95 PIKE RIDES DOWN TO HIM,. SWINGS OFF EIS HORSE and stands
looking down.
96 THE BLIND MAN, HEARING HIM,, gropes in his direction.
Buck lurches forward, grabbing at Pike who steps back, Pike
crosses to his horse, and painfully climbs into the saddle.
(dying, almost incoherent
with pain)
I kin still -ride...I can't see, but I
kin ride...
OVER BACKWARDS. He slides several feet over the smooth,
round pebbles of the wash, then is still.
Pike turns his horse and spurs it . up the slope.
100 THE MEN WATCH SILENTLY AS PIKE RIDES UP. and halts. They
don't move, all looking down-at-Buck.
(after a. long moment,
trying to cover the loss)
You boys want to move on -- or stay here
and give him a 'decent burial'.?
(the sentimentalist)
Well,. he was a good man --
He's dead!
And he's got a 'lot of 'good men? back
there to keep him company.
Too damn many.
I'd like. to say a. few kind words for
all the departed -- then perhaps a hymn
or two would be in order -- followed by
a' church supper with a choir. CONTINTED
(riding away)
Crazy bastards -- both of you l
Tector follows his brother, cursing..
101 PIKE AND DUTCH LOOK AT EACH OTHER silently -- try to grin --
finally make it -- then follow. The bunch is attentive, but
can relax a little..
Pike and Dutch are side by side.
,Ten years ago it was some shaky
drunk with a tin badge that hid
in the g1n mill till you cleared
town with your grab...Now, they're
c waitin'. for you --
With old friends. '
(pulling back to'
join them)
Old friends?
Deke Thornton.
I thought he was your partner?
He was -- but he got old and tired
and when that happens, things change.
'He changed -- you didn't.'
The following scenes will be superimposed over 101 and 102.
The suite consists of three adjoining rooms and is very
plush indeed,
TWO VERY BEAUTIFUL-YOUNG WOMEN in revealing night dress are
hindering more than helping, a somewhat loaded Pike Bishop
as he attempts to get into his clothes. The ladies are
giggling. and there is a great deal of grab-ass between the
three. -
101-B THORNTON, fully dressed and looking very sharp in his big
city clothes, enters from one of. the adjoining rooms.
ELIZABETH, a tall, lovely near-naked,.dark-haired girl,
follows him and takes his arm possessively. For a moment
both watch:
101-C PIKE'S girls'effectively stop his half-hearted attempts and
begin disrobing him.
Come on pardner, let's get out
of here. -
(Grinning at him)-
You.sound like you're all caught
up,
Caught up enough to know we've
overstayed our welcomes
(Suddenly angry)
What in hell is the matter with
you?
Stay -- please,
We've got money.to spend and
not a worry in the worlds
They're not going to look for
us in their own backyard,
How can you be. so damned sure?
He shakes off the girl, crosses to a sideboard, pours a
drink..
That's my business -- being sure.
There is a knock at the door and. Thornton whirls. Elizabeth
throws the bolt.
Hold it!
Relax -- just a little champagne
I ordered.
DOOR and gunfire fills the room as:
high on the shoulder. Thornton. is knocked sprawling... The
Deputy moves into the room (followed by three other men)
and fires at Pike but misses, as.
101-F PIKE SLIPS PAST the screaming women into an adjoining room.
The other men pursue.P.ike as the Deputy bends down and
snaps Thornton's wrists together with handcuffs. The sound:
of gunfire is heard from the street outside, then two of
the men re-enter the room. The Deputy looks up..
Get him?
The man shakes his head.
101-G THORNTON, HIS FACE TWISTED WITH PAIN AND BITTERNESS, makes
no attempt ato struggle as he .is pulled to his feet and
moved out the door.
102, THEY ARE SILENT, RIDING, EVEN LYLE is embarrassed by this
that.can hurt a man.
(after a moment)
Say -- I've heard it's like the.old
times in Argentina...3utch Cassidy
down. there making a killing...
Bolivia...but it'll be over there
too, pretty soon. Those :pining
companies will bring down a bunch
.of hardcases and Butchtll get his..
..Every one of us is worth a year of
drinking and whoring to any fool that
can read a wanted poster and carry a
gun.
Deke Thornton isn't just. any fool that
can carry a gun and read-a wanted
poster.
Fo -- but he takes a dim view of 20
more years in the Carcel --
don't bet on it..
Tector and I have been stealing since
the big depression and we ain't never
been caught. This Thornton don't bother
us nohe..
I don't really give a damn about Deke
Thornton...I just know that I'd surely
like to aet the hell off. this horse.
107 THORNTON-LOOKS AT HIM WHITE WITH ANGER, then .c ntrols it -
he is trapped. Finally, he nods and moves away, then stops
and turns back, his anger almost beyond any control.
Tell me, Mr. Harrigan.-- how does
it feel?
(as Harrigan looks at him)
Getting paid for it?
(stepping closer)
-Getting paid to sit back and hire
your killings with the law's arms
around you? How does it feel to
be so damned right;?
(after a moment, coldly)
Good, Mr..Thornton...it feels good.
You dirty son of a bitch.
(grinning at him)
You have 30 days to get him -- or 30 days
to Yuma. You're my Judas Goat, Mr. Thornton.
(motioning to the bunkhouse)
Use them -- lead them -- get Pike --
then kill them off. When you come back,
I: want all of them head down over a
saddle.
(pointing to the bunkhouse
All of them -a- head down over a- saddle.
(as Thornton starts to speak)
30 days.
Heturns and walks away whistling.
108 THE WILD BUNCH PULLS UP at the railroad which marks the
border and look out into Mexico.
Mexico lindo.
What's so 'lindoA about it.
The interior of the room is tawdry, disorderly and smells
bad. The bare walls are decorated with pin-ups from the
Police Gazette.
The men sit attentively on the bunks. and.foot lockers.,
Harrigan is marking beside their names in a large ledger
book. After making a 'notation, he looks up..
The hard money value of the men
killed less my commi.sson amounts
to. one hundred and fifty dollars.
104 THE MEN MUMBLE AND SHIFT. Harrigan holds up four wanted
posters. The bounty hunters move closer for a better look.
Bishop... .Engstrom... .Lyle and Tector
Gorch...are worth a total of four
thousand five hundred dollars -- and
you let them all ride outs
(after a moment)
Any one'of these pelts would not only
clear you with the company,.but would
mean a bundle of cash to raise hell
with.
Harrigan stands, crosses to the door.
How '.bout a little liquor money for
tonight, Mr. Harrigan?
There won't be any tonight -- you
move after them in ten minutes --
(turning back)
Get them -- get Pike and youtre rich.
(then).
But if one of you quits on me I'll pay
a thousand dollar bonus to the man who kills
him.
105 THE MEN SILENTLY BEGIN TO PACK THEIR BELONGINGS. Harrigan
106 HARRIGAN AND THORNTON WALK AWAY FROM the bunkhouse into the
deserted railroad yard..
Why should I let you go with them?
We've'been over that before, Mr.
Harrigan.
You could just ride off -- even join
him again -- you'd like that, wouldn't
.you?
What I like and what I. need are two
different things.
'Listen -- I don't want to go back to
prison, Mr. Harrigan,... .not ever -- but
it.has to be my way...
All right..
I need good men: You saw what happened
today.
You'll use what you have.
And you'll see it doesn't happen again
or I'll see you dead or rotting for -the
rest of -- you try
your life behind bars
to run -- I'll be after you and so will.
they.
I gave you my word.
We'll -see what it's worth -- five
minutes.
Just more of Texas as far as I'm concerned.
You have no eyes.
And he rises ahead with Pike and'Dutch across the tracks
into Mexico.
I knowed I wounded' three -- but
I wasn't sure about --
(as the others yell in
Jabali:...
111 JABALI, AN AGING NAVAHO INDIAN trots up to.him'.
This pelt should clear you up -- take
him back to town...and tell Harrigan
to get me a list of every Army garrison
and payroll schedule on the border.
(to.the.others, crossing to
his horse)
We got another half hour of light and
they might be just up ahead counting
their money.
A young boy takes their horses while an old.man and his
wounded son (the father of the boy) watch. Behind them,
an ancient woman pays no attention as she slaps tortillas
into shape. Two small children watch, big-eyed.
;113 THE MEN ARE QUIET WITH FATIGUE AS THEY DISMOUNT AND TIE. j
THEIR HORSES.. FREDDY SYKES, a skinny old man in tattered range
clothes, crosses to Pike as he unloads his saddle bags.
Them others ain't comin'?
No.
(after a moment)
None of 'em?
111 PIKE TAKES THE BAGS OUT OF THE CORRAL TO THE FIRE that burns
near an adobe wall and drops them on a poncho, watches as
the others do the same.
(joining him again; worried)
But I got horses and gear for all
them fellers like you said --
They won't need them -- we will.
Sykes thinks this over, finally nods. a little and turns away.
115 LYLE AND HIS BROTHER AND DUTCH STAND in a half. circle around
the poncho. waiting. Angel, the last, drops his saddle bag,
then crosses to the wall and drops down to rest. For a long
moment the men look down.a-t the pile of saddle bags.
About the sharing up...
The sharing up's going to be the
some as always.
(whining; pointing to
Tector and I don? t like the idea of him
getting the same as us...He's just
starting out and this is our stake for
new territory.
Pike looks at him silently. He has heard this kind of
argument many times in the past and it is obvious he is sick
to death of it. Lyle finally looks awa- at his brother;
And I figure a 'share to that old
man for watching the horses is a
share too much.
ll& PIKE TAKES A KNIFE OUT OF HIS BELT, opens a saddle bag,.
takes out a sack of silver, kneels to slit the bag open.
You hear me, Pike? -- I said it
ain't fair...
Pike stands,. flips the knife into the ground, faces the
brothers.
If you two boys don't like equal
shares why in hell don't you just
take it all?
They look at him silently.
MOVES OUT OF THE BACKGROUND, a buffalo gun now dangling
from one arm. The brothers tense. Angel laughs softly.
(almost a whisper)
Well,..why don't you answer me, you
dapnned yellow.-livered trash?
The brothers fide, et., look at each other.
Ah.--' Pike, you know...
(his voice a whip)
I don't know a damned thing except
I either lead this bunch or I end
it -- right now;
No, sir -- we divide just as you
say.
Pike looks at them a moment, then picks up his knife and
alicea open a bag and -turns it upside down and dumps the
contents onto the spread-out poncho watching as:
119 THE GROUP IS SILENT IN DISBEL'EF staring at the pile of
worthless steel. Hykes eases up, takes a cautious look.
Rings:, Steel rings!
(quietly).
Washers!
More-washers pour out. _
121 LYLE'S BOOT FLASHES INTO THE PILE. The washers fly in all
directions. Lyle whirls on Pike.
Washers...we shot our way out of
that town for a dollar's worth of
steel holes.
He kicks into the pile and scatters Washers across the
clearing.
They set it up:
(yelling).
Who the hell is 'they!!?
(laughing; cackling)
'They?': by 'they, are just plain
and fancy 'they.' 'They.'
(dancing around them his
high laughter splitting
the night)
Caught you, didn't they? Tied a tin
can to your tail -- didn't they?
Lead you in and waltzed you out -- Oh
my what a bunch -- big tough ones --
standing around with a handful of
holes -- a thumb up your ass and a
big grin to pass the time of day with.
122 TECTORSWINGS AT HIM, BUT THE OLD MAN DUCKS, then falls and
rollsaway, still laughing. Tector starts'to follow, Pike
stepsbetween them.
Railroad men -- Pinkertons -- bounty
.Deke Thornton.
(in disbelief )
Deke Thornton? -- He was with. them?
(as Pike doesn't answer;
How come you didn't know?
ALL TURN as the SOUND of laughter comes from behind.
.(to Tector)
Hey, gringo; You take my share.
126 BEFORE HE CAN DRAW ANGEL'S. EXPRESSION TURNS serious and a
gun is suddenly in his hand covering the big outlaw. Angel
smiles again...then pleads mockingly.
Don't kill me, gringo ...por favor...
Take my share of the 'silver' -- but
don't kill me, please.
Tector tenses, almost snarling with rage..
,k for it I
Tector-, looking at Angel's gun, half turns to Pike.
(continuing; softly)
Go on, fall apart!
Lyle and Tector hesitate, their hands on their guns -- Dutch
moves back into the shadows of the firelight, his rifle
drifting across Tector.
127 ANGEL SMILES AND SLOWLY replaces his gun.
hesitates.
129 TECTOR LOOKS AT PIKE, DUTCH, ANGEL, T.HEN slaps his gun into
from the weapon..
hands'it to Dutch.
Dutch sits by Sykes, takes a drink, offers the bottle to
Tector, Tector hesitates, then hunkers down and drinks.
Slowly the others.follow suit.
(as the bottle moves around)
What's our next move?
Maybe that damned railroad:
That railroad sire bsi hell ain't
getting 4ny easier. a
And we,ain't getting any younger.
For a moment, it looks like he'll get a smart answer in
return, then:
Lyle drinks and lifts the bottle to Angel who.crosses to.the
fire,. drinks and passes it to Sykes.
.We got to start thinking beyond
our guns -- theft days are closin'
fast.
(without malice)
All your fancy planning and talk
damn near got us shot to pieces
for.some lousy bags of washers...
Now this was goin.' to be our last
job before we head south ...We spent
all our time and money getting ready
for this.
You spent your time and money running
whores in Hondo while I spent my stake
setting it up.
LYLE CALMLY PICKS UP A WASHER, flips. it to (or at) Pike who
catches it, looks at it, through it, drinks, tosses it back
on the pile.
Looks like I'd have been better
off running whores than making plans9
stealing horses and buying uniforms.
1.32 THE MEN ARE SILENT FOR A LONG MOMENT. Then they break into
He breaks up and can't continue.
(his laughter growing)
,-While you was getting your bell
rope pulled by --
(standing; almost choking)
By two -- mind you, two -- Hondo
whores -- while Pike's dreaming of
washers - you're matching two of
them -- in tandem
And the wild bunch falls apart in laughter -- even Pike is
caught, but as he laughs, he knows that they are together
again.
How close you figure we are?
Not close enough... They're across the
border by now. -
Deke - you rode with. Pike -- what
(after a long moment; softly)
The best --
(after a moment)
And he won't be if you boys don't
learn your trade. -
How was it -- then mm
You know -- in the old days? I only
come out here last spring.
(after a long moment)
You can saddle up or shut up -- take
your choice --
(after a long moment)
"What will he do?
That's what I have to figure.
Maybe they'll split up.
No -- not 'that. bunch. They'll try
134 PIKE AND DUTCH ARE SIDE BY SIDE IN THEIR blankets listening
Yeah, I helped run a little copper --
nothing for us there except day wages,
if it was running now -- which it ain't.
135 PIKE FINDS IT.IMPOSSIBLE TO get comfortable. Groaning and
wincing with pain he shifts on the bedroll.
Why in the hell, did you ever quit it?
Why in hell are you still goin'?
I don.'t know"any better -- maybe
don't want any better,
(then, after a moment)
Hell, I wouldn't know what to do
with 'better' if it poked me.in the
eye with a sharp stick.
(laughing softly)
You -never gave it :a chance9 Pike.
I threw away more chances in one
year that you will see in your
whole.l.ife -- but that don't mean
you have. to ' be a damn fool like me.
Dutch sits up, rolls and lights a cigarette.
You got a halfway hard mouth, partner.
What in hell do you want me to-say ,-?
Just don't give me, no lectures..
They are silent -- finally:
This was going to be my last, too...
I'm not getting around any better --
like the red-haired lady said to the.
white-haired judge -- 'I only got so
many miles left -in my backside, Your
Honor, and I aim to keep it moving
while I'm still young enough to feel.
what it's there for.'
(a.s Dutch -laughs softly)
I'd like to make a good score -. then
back off. CONTINUED
Back off to what?
(as Pike doesn't answer)
Any real ideas for a next one?
Pike closes his eyes and leans back.
Pershing. has. got men spread over
the whole border. Everyone of those
garrisons is going to be.gptting
payroll.
That kind of information is kind of.
rough to come by.
(sitting up)
Well -- I don't figure it's going to
.be easy, but it can be done.
They'll be waiting for us.
I wouldn',t have it any other way.
136- MOST OF THE BOUNTY HUNTERS ARE ASLEEP, only'Thornton and Cof -
fer are awake. Thornton sits up,.begins to roll a cigarette.
If he's in old Mex -- do we follow
him?
No.
Why not ?..
He'll be back.
Harrigan ' said something about
thirty days --
(after a moment)
That's what he said,
You must have hurt that railroad
pretty bad -- they spent a lot of
time and money getting that ambush set
up for us.
(smiling at the memory)
Well, I caught up to them -- two or
three times -- There was a man named
doing things -- So I made him change
his ways -- when you do that to a
there-'s a hell of a lot of people, Dutch --
that just can't stand to be wrong.
Pride, I guess
I guess -- but they can't ever forget
it -- that pride that being wrong
or learn by it.
Well, I surely hope to God we did.
138 SYKES CROSSES TO PIKE, GIVES HIM a cup of coffee, moves
away,
Where'd you find him?
138 (Cont,)
.(softly)
That toothless old wreck was a real
gun about twenty years back --
used to run with Thornton and me
killed his share and more -- around
----Langery -- Ambushed stages all along
that old board highway.,.He had those
Swede immigrants so scared theyQd
starve rather than go to town and
by beans for their kids, and there
wasn't a sheriff in. the territory
to take issue --
He laughs, drinks the coffee and gags..
And he ain't changed -- only now-he
does his killing with a coffee cup.
Dutch laughs and then both lean back listeningas:
139. ANGEL, WRAPPED IN HIS SERAPE LEANING AGAINST THE-WALL, plays
the great ranchero songs of old Mexico.,
140 LYLE.AND TECTOR ARE ALSO AWAKE and listening.
(softly) -
Pike, I wouldn?t have it no other
-way aither.
1L.2 THE SAND IS LOOSE AND THE FOOTING EXTREMELY DIFFICULT as they
start down in single file, Sykes is last, he leads his own
horse, a pack animal, and three of the empties.
143 SUDDENLY SYKES SLIPS AND LOSES HIS-FOOTING. He falls
PULLING THE FIVE HORSES DOWN WITH HIM.. Unable to
control his slide he collides with/Tector who is next in
line. Tector's fall starts a p fain reaction in which
all the men slide to the bottom of ttLe hill.
145 PICKING UP SPEED THEY TUMBLE TO THE BOTTOM and land in
a giant cloud of. dust. There. is a: profusion of coughing
and swearing as the men and-animals struggle to their
feet..
146 TECTOR STANDS,. CURSES AT SYKES,. then picks up a. stone
and throws it at.the old man who is hit and falls
backward.
Leave him alone!
Hats goin' to get pis killed -- get
rid of him!
We don.'t get rid of nobody
we stick together -- just like
it used to be -- when you side
aman you stay with him --
(shaking him)
than some animal -- you're finished --
we're finished -- all of us!
Tector looks at him silently.
148 PIKE TURNS TO MOUNT THE HORSE. Placing his foot in
the stirrup he stiffly starts to swing on. The leather
breaks and. he falls under the animal. Landing on his
back, he lets out a loud shriek.
1.9 THE OTHER N'EN LOOK DOWN AT HIM AS TEEM MOUNT. Dutch,
help.
150 PIKE STRUGGLES TO HIS FEET. None of them move forward
to help him and he doesn't expect them to. He is
visibly miserable as he recovers the reins of his
animal and tears off the.broken leather.
151 LYLE AND TECTOR GRIN A LITTLE. Sykes turns away.
'Pears 'Brother Pike' needs help,
Brother Lyle.
Riding with 'Brother Pike' and old
.man Sykes makes a man wonder if it
ain't time to pick up his chips
and-find another game.
(suddenly yelling
at Pike)
How in hell are you going to side any-
body if you can't get on a horse.
152 PIKE LOOKS AT THEM, THEN STEPS onto the makeshift stirrup
and mounts, concealing his pain, taking a few seconds to
gather up the reins and position himself. In the b.g.,
Dutch swings onto his horse.
Were about two hours from the
Santa Caterinas.
He turns and rides toward the mountains, the men following.
That was a mighty fine talk you
gave the boys 'bout stickin' to-
gether.
(as Pike doesn't
That Gorch was near killin' me
or me him --
Damned old fool like me's not worth.
takin' along.
We started together -- we'll end it
together.
By God, that's the way I see it --
that's the way it's always been with
me...Sorry 'bout Deke - never
figured him that way,
(then, as Pike
doesn't answer)
Back in. San. Rafael -- my boy how' d.
he do?
finally:. _
Your boy2
C.L. -- Clarence Lee -- my daughter's
him -- you do -- just what Mister Bishop
says -- Did he conduct hisself well?
(after a long moment)
He did fine --
Why didn't you tell me he was your
grandson?
Well, you had enough on your mind
He had to pull his weight just like
the rest of us -- just wanted to know
he didn't let you down -- run. when
things got hot --
(after a moment)
No ---he did fine...just fine.
THORN TON AND THE BOUNTY HITTERS follow the wild bunch's
trail. They are hot and tired and with the exception of
Thornton,.. are apprehensive.
Coffer pulls up, calls to Thornton:
That culvert -- good place for them
----to make an ambush.
Go on - ride up and find out.
Coffer hesitates, his -ayes wide with fear. Thornton draws
his gun, pulls back the hammer.
Go onl
Coffer rides forward.
(to the others)
Next time I want advice from any of you
scum I'll ask for it -- until then, keep .
your mouths shut and do what y-ou' re to ld%
(turning back, calling)
All clear"'--
INTO the shade, the others follow suit.
From here on, its Mexico, Mr, Thornton.
Do we follow?
What's the closest town of any size2
Agua Verde -- maybe two or three days.
(then, pointing in the
apposite direction)
Juarez -- five -- six days hard riding,
What's in Agua Verde?
Headquarters for Huerta regulars.
fighting Obregon, led by an old time
bandit named Mapache.
Thornton thinks about this, then mounts and rides back in
the direction they have come from.
Don't-we follow?
No -- we wait.
How long --a Mr. Thornton.
'Twenty-eight days.
'156 THE BANDITS ARE RIDING under'a broad sky across through a
destroyed pueblo filled with silent ghostlike people, four
or five crying children, vultures and four men hanging
from a tree. In the distance is a high range of mountains.
Angel spurs his horse and rides up beside Pike.
(to Pike)
We're not going to find much down here.,
That damned Huerta' s scraped it clean.
(in Spanish)
May he die the death of a thousand
traitors.
, ( then)
My village is up there ...in those
mountains.
So --?
I wish to visit my f amily...I can do
it and meet you in Agua Verde a day
of ter you get there.
How?
Going this way, you will. have to turn
east when you get south of the range...
I-know the way to cross the mountains.
If you know a shorter way..': show us.
Angel looks away and is silent for several seconds.
Ashamed of having us meet your people?
Yes.;..They don' t know about zny life
when I am out of the village.
Pike and Dutch both laugh softly, then Pike pulls up at a .
watering trough and dismounts as his horse begins to drink.
Far as Ifm concerned, you can go,
(dismounting, joining
Far as I'm concerned -- he goes he
dontt come back.
That sounds right to me..
Looks like I'm outvoted.
Whatfs the problem?
Wants to visit his folks alone -- thinks
we're a little rank for his people.
14k.
(as Tector drinks beside
his horse)
I think he can go straight to hell.
Probably wants to get a bunch of his
_people and waylay us!
And take what?
Tector thinks this over, doesn't answer.
(to Angel)
How do' you want it?
(after a long moment)
I invite you to my village -- my home.
(then, looking at Tector
and Lyle)
Any violence -- any disrespect -- and
I will. kill you.
Tector and Lyle look at him without expression for a moment,
then:.
You got a sister?
...Yes.
I would be proud to.make her acquaint-
ance -- and. that of your Mama, too.
(trying not to laugh)
And your Grandmaw too, sonny...
Angel looks at them, then mounts, rides toward the mountains
158 THORNTON AND HIS BOUNTY HUNTERS are riding back past the place
where Buck died. The men are sullen,. some almost openly
defiant.
We go back with our tail between our
legs Harrigan will have our hides.
They'll be coming back -- and we'll
be waiting for them.
We was supposed to go after them --
Thornton reins up, looks at Coffer, who looks quickly away.
You have something to say?
Coffer instantly lifts his hands in submission and shakes
his head. Then, after a moment:
They say Freddy Sykes is with them --
you rode with the old man, didn't you,
Mr. Thornton -- you and Pike and the
old man?
But Thornton rides on and doesn't answer.
159 TECTOR AND LYLE ARE SEATED ON THE GROUND trying to duplicate
the intricacies oA a very complicated cat's cradle demon-
strated to them by ROCIO, the lovely bright-eyed 13 year old
sister of Angel. Both men are drinking tequilla, but both
are sober, entranced and completely dominated by the girl.
All three straighten as:
160 CARMEN, ANGEL'S MOTHER, CALLS from a nearby fire where she
Miha -- trigame auga.por los frijolesl
The girl jumps to her feet, hands both men a bucket (or olla)
and leads.them down the bank to the river. (The natural
beauty of this location should contrast with other landscapes
in the picture. This village and its inhabitants represent
a complete and green contrast to the arid world of the
wild bunch),
FEW FEET AWAY. Angel watches dully,. his eyes mirroring his
agony. Pike laughs softly, watching.
Hard to believe.
Not so hard -- we all dream of being
a-child again -- even the worst of us --
perhaps the worst most of all..
(looking: at him)
You know us, then --
I know myself only -- where I have been,
what I have done.
Like to ride with us, old man?
And for a moment, the old man's eyes flash as he watches:
162- DUTCH AND THREEVILLAGERS SHOEING a very small, very mean
16L. mule. All four have been drinking a little and are thoroughly
enjoying themselves as is the mule as he pitches and knocks
them all sprawling..
-- I am too old.
(almost cursing, indicating
.Too old even to ride beside this
ancient gringo.
Hell, you ain't so old; partner.
And the soldier. who shot my father
what was his name?
They were many -- who shot -- your father
resisted like a man and died like a man --
names in this matter have no importance.
(to Pike proudly)
I killed one;
I lie -- I ran --
Joe --'by God I like you. I like a
man who tells the truth.
And the leader -- how was he called?
(after a moment)
Mapache.
That is.name enough.
The Federal. troops they don? t.
protect you --
They were Federal troops; -- commissioned
by the traitor Huerta -- seven of the
village were killed --.our horses and
cattle and corn stolen -- all in the name
of Huerta, the killer of our President
Francisco I.. Madero -- In Mexico, Senor -
these are the years of sadness.
(after a long moment,
And Teresa?
Gone.
They took her?
No -- she went with them because she
wished to. She became the woman of
Mapache -- and others -- she went with
them laughing -- Drunk with wine and love.
Angel, knowing it's true, turns and moves away. Pike looks
after him.'
-So Angel lives with a dream -- while
Mapache eats the mango --
Just so -
You have been there -- with the dream?
Many times -- and with the mango too.
You just bet he has, Joe.
I never could carry a candle to you,
old timer.
(to Pike)
And. which do you prefer, the dream or
the taste?
I dream when I sleep -- and eat when
I'm hungry.
(laughing with Sykes)
Just so a -- the both of you and Map-ache
and I --
168 ANGEL, SOME DISTANCE AWAY, watches evening come upon the
quiet village and watches:
169 TECTOR AND LYLE moving from the pond carrying water, now
70 DUTCH AND THE THREE OLD MEN trying to pound a horseshoe
an the mule.
1.71 HIS MOTHER AND GRANDMOTHER AND other village women now
172 PIKE,. SYKES AND HIS-GRANDFATHER laughing in the ramada.
17 3 ANGEL TURNS AWAY, his eyes suddenly blind with tears,.
Then,-turns and crosses to his Grandfather..
Where is Mapache?;
'17L. THORNTON LEADS THE BOUNTY HUNTERS ALONG THE RAILS toward the
bunkhouse. They have been riding a long time. The men are
tired and bitter. Suddenly Coffer draws his gun and points
it at Thornton's back.. For a moment it. looks as if he will
shoot, then Thornton pulls up sharply,. and kicks his. horse
to one side as:
176 MOST OF THE VILLAGE IS gathered around three or four fires
- watching:.
177 TECTOR AND LYLE dance a Mexican Virginia reel as
178 SYKES BLOWS ACCOMPANIMENT with harmonica along with two
bashful, teachers.
You must tell me.- where Map ache?
laughing softly to himself, finally turns, his smile fading.
Why do you wish to know -- for your
father - or the whore?
Pike looks up as Angel fights within himself to find an
answer,
It doesn't make any difference, kid
our business is in Agua Verde
For a moment Angel looks like he will explode, then he
lifts a bottle of tequi.lla in salute to Pike.
As you say, Jefe - to Agua Verde and
'our business.'
182 PIKE AND THE-OTHER It N ARE WATERING THEIR HORSES under the
shade of several large trees in the main plaza of Agua Verde,.
The town itself is dull and sun colored like. the surrounding
country. Its most remarkable features are a great deal of
soldiers exiting and entering a cantina-like building and
a small, aging, ornate, church.
18 3 SYKES PURCHASES A TACO FROM A SMALL BOY and gums at it
while the contents run into his beard.
18. PIKE LIFTS A STIRRUP FROM HIS SADDLE on the hitching rail
away. a.
185 DUTCH LEAVES. THE BUILDING and joins Pike.
We'll go. have a drink, then try and
sell the horses.
'Who'.s going to buy -- looks to me like.
this place has been picked clean.
(joining Pike)
He's been here;
186 THE HORSES PUT THEIR EARS BACK and whinny nervously as an
incredible noise is heard off scene. The men snap their
heads.around and look at:
STREET towards the plaza. Inside is the almost ghostlike
appearance of a 1912 or 1913 touring car. Four mounted men
are riding on each side and a host of small.children are
running, screaming, behind it.
AND POLISHING. The mounted guards. take up positions around
the vehicle. The group shows deference to a large man
wearing general's braid. -EL 'MAPACHE. Next to him is his
second in command, ZAMORRA. The third man dressed in white
linen is MOHR, a German military advisor. With him is ERNST,
his aide.
189 PIKE AND THE OTHERS WATCH with interest as the men enter a
street, drawn to the vehicle. Angel is tense, knowing
that his man has arrived.
I seen one just like this in Waco...
Run on steam?
No...alcohol:...or gasoline.
190 FREDDY SYKES EDGES UP CLOSE TO PIKE. He is anxious to make
a. statement and he speaks to him as he walks around the car.
Pike... .I heard about one they got up
north that. kin fly;
Pike nods sagely. Te.ctor Gorch on the other side of the
car hears the remark.
.That was a balloon ,you damned old fool.
No,. the old man's right. They -got t em
now with motors and wings -- cover 60
miles in less than an hour...goin' to
use them in the war, they say.
(as T(ector looks at
him astonished)
This could cover. 30 miles in an hour --
' cording to the road, of course.
That could run a horse right into the
ground.
Not that easy -- these automobiles can't
stand.any rough ground -- or hot sun
like a horse ---they're for show mostly.
191 TECTOR TOUCHES A FENDER AND ONE of the guards spurs toward
him, cursing in Spanish. Tector backs off,. hands in the air.
I was just going to touch th.,e damn
thing, not marry it.
Y el dueno -- un general por lo menos.
(And the owner -- a general at least.)
Mapache? Mis que un general - un hombre
hecho para reinar todo Mexico, si Dios quiere.
(Mapache? More than a general -- a man
to.rule all of Mexico if God wills.)
You're here with us,pardner -- any
business you got with the general comes
after we finish ours -- and that is
selling horses..
(after a moment, shrugging)
As you wish.
He turns away, Pike grabs him, jerks him back,
You make.one move to trouble and I'll
-kill you -- understand -- we stick
together.
(before Angel can answer)
Angel -- who does this thing belong to?
(with due respect)
Es el carrazo oficial de.su excelencia
el Generalisimo Mapache.
Dutch turns smiling and tells the others.
The official carrazo of the Pache
Generalisimo. CONTINUED
Let's get some beer and talk to the
general about his automobile and our
extra horses,,.nice and easy.
The men turn and follow him into the cantina.
HACIENDA FILLED WITH MEXICANS wearing the uniforms of
Huerta,' s counter-revolutionary army and their ladies,,
A small mariachi band wanders among the. tables. playing folk.
songs of the era. In certain areas horses are stabled.--
a blacksmith shop is working, guns are being repaired, knives
and bayonets sharpened..,and food is being cooked for the
troops by their women. Kids, as .always,. are very evident.
19L. MAPACHE AND HIS GROUP ARE SEATED AT A TABLE which is in' a
covered area raised above the others. It is obvious from.
his position and respect accorded him that he is the local
.boss of the area.' The German officer, Mohr, and Ernst, are
'sitting on one side of him. Lieutenant Zamorra is seated
on the other side. Herrera is close by.
1.95. PIKE AND THE OTHERS MOVE TOWARDS A CORNER of the cantina
eyeing the Mexicans with the kind of caution that men who
are vastly outnumbered generally show.. They sit quietly
at a table, ignoring the suspicious looks of the soldiers.
196 AT MAPACHE'S LONG TABLE, the General and the Germans watch
them with pointed interest. Mohr nudges Mapache and asks
who they are. Mapache shr ugs -- he doesn't know,
197 EMMA, A PRETTY WAITRESS, CROSSES TO PIKE'S table to take
their order.
Diga?
Beers.. six cervesas,
Como?
Angel remains silent, looking at the General,
Seii cervesas.
The girl leaves to' get the order. The men at the table look
around the cantina. At a nearby table a group of men are
throwing dice and laughing loudly. The mariachis are gather-
ing around Mapache.. Lyle shifts in his chair to look at them.
198 MAPACHE IS LAUGHING AND DRINKING. The German. leans close
to Zamorra and speaks in Spanish.
Do you know these Americans?
No.
The German settles back in his.chair and. begins placing
a cigarette in a holder.
in the cantina. The other men tired from the trail only
half listen to them as the girl serves beer.
Probably talking about us behind our
backs.
200 DUTCH TURNS TO PIKE WHO IS QUAFFING a large beer.
a of the country ...He ought to have it
to spare.
Generalisimo hell -- he's just a damn
bandit grabbing all he can for himself.
Like some others I could mention?
No sir -- we don't.hang nobody or
torture them -- I hope the people
here kick him and the rest of the scum
like him right into-their graves.
MAPACHE, his eyes burning with hatred.
We will if it takes a thousand years:
Then suddenly, he reacts to the sound of a girl's voice off
scene.
Vamos:...te va. gustar el Alenman:
Angel. spins around in his chair watching as:
202 TWO PRETTY MEXICAN GIRLS, TERESA AND RASA, laughing and
giggling, pass-the table.
.Teresa;
He reaches out and grabs the better looking of the two by
the arm.
Hey,. boy...you know them cuties?
Teresa recognizes him,: then pulls away,
Llamo los otros!
No, Vete, ahorita vengo;
Pike and Dutch tense as Angel stands and jerks her toward
him, -
Let her go!
203 ANGEL LOOKS AT THE GIRL, furious and hurt..
Djaste el pueblo;
Si deje el pinche pueblo. Y ahora
vivo con el generalisimo;
She jerks away from Angel and starts toward the other table.
Angel. watches her go. In the b.g.,the group of Mariachis
playing loudly have moved around Mapache's table.. No one
there seems. to have seen the action.
Take it easy!
He places a hand on Angel's shoulder.
(to Angel)
Que pasa::
His sweetheart --
(still. watching Teresa)
"She was my woman and she left the
village.,
and begins kissing his ear..
Sure ain't your woman no more.'
Just look at her licking that, big devil's ear.
Angel watches, his rage growing, then stands -- Pike goes
for-him., .. but too late..
Put a!
In a split second he draws and fires.
and hurls her to the floor. The others at the table duck
for cover, their guns coming out.
into the side of his head dropping him onto the floor, knock-
ing him out. The others stand, hands an -theirguns,
Mapache and the'others slowly rise, look at Angel, now
realizing who shot the girl.
208 MAPACHE STARTS TOWARDS THEM. He pushes over chairs and shoves
people aside as he approaches the group. Zamorra9 the Germans
and other members of his retinue are close on his heels.
up to the'table and quickly scans the group.. Angel gets to
his knees9 Mapache kicks him in the.head and when Angel. falls
back, stamps him several times with his boot,, steps away.
One of Mapache's men starts to bash Angel's head with a rifle`
butt,. Mapache stops the man with a gesture,. then turns to
the others.
Qua basura es este?
Mapache again. kicks Angel..
Why did he try to kill His Excellency...?
He didn't, he was. after the girl...
Mapache is having difficulty understanding. He looks at
Z'amorra with a puzzled expression.
La.muchacha,..
Era su novia;
The Mexicans immediately respond to Dutch's explanation.
Both Z.amorra and Mapache smile.
His fiancee??...
He went a little crazy when he saw
her with you.
Mapache laughs. His ego is pleased with the idea that.he
had taken someone's woman. He turns and explains grandly
in Spanish to the rest of. the cantina.
Mato su vieja porque salio con El Mapache;
The soldiers in the cantina laugh and ad lib their response..
210 PIKE. AND DUTCH TRY TO SMILE as do the Gorch brothers and Sykes.
211 MOHR IGNORES them, looking with interest at the U.S..Army
.45 pistols that the men are wearing.
(.to Pike)
Are you men in Agua Verde for business?
Thought we might sell a few horses.
You must have been associated with
the American Army, is that riot so?
Tector and Lyle snicker slightly at the remark. Mapache and
Zamorra turn, listening carefully to the conversation.
The cantina is silent.
-No -- were not associated with anyone...
I see,..1 was curious because of.the
equipment which you are carrying.
(as they look at him)
That pistol is restricted for use'by
army personnel. It can't be purchased
or even owned... legally.
Is that so? - -
You're surprised at my interest?
(then as Pike doesn't answer)
Weapons are a specialty of mine.
Mohr bows his head slightly and clicks his heels barely audib3y,
I am Commander Frederick Mohr-of the
Imperial German. Army. For the last six-
months I have been in Mexico helping
fight against the revolutionaries.
212. ANGEL ON THE FLOOR IS CONSCIOUS, but uimoving., listening to
what is being said. Several of Mapache's men stand around him.
Unfortunately your government has chosen
to aid the rabble in their so-called
struggle for liberty...
I. never heard of any American troops
fighting down here...
They are aiding in diplomatic channels...
It would be very useful to us if we knew
of Americans who did not share their
government's naive sentiments.
We have vez"y'few sentiments in common
with our government.
Qua diga?
(Xn Spanish)
Generalisimo, I think we should ask
these gentlemen to have a drink with us.
And Pike, understanding. that much Spanish, smiles as we.
TRUMPET AS he looks at the body of Teresa being dragged
out. Emma and.Rosa'are still very much in evidence..
214 AT MAPACHE'S TABLE, PIKE, DUTCH, LYLE, TECTOR AND SYKES are
all seated at the raised table on the dais..,. Mapache seated
at one end is tired and looks half asleep,.
In the b.g. Angel can be seen still on the floor. A couple
of guards are sitting near him.
2,15 SEVERAL MARS. ARE SPREAD OUT on the table.
Emma and Rosa crying softly, watch as the dead body of the
girl. is dragged through a door at one end of the room.
Zamorra is seated.next to the German listening intently,
Of all those garrison rail spurs that
ofie is the easiest to hit -- But I've
got to figure where we can get out with.
the wagon.
216 HE POINTS TO A PLACE ON THE MAP, looks at Dutch who shrug,
doubtfully,
(to ZRmorre)
Why do you want us to
hit a train that's so close to the
border ...The General could take an
army up there and get it.
President Huerta is anxious to better
relations with the U.S. -- not destroy
them. -
Arms shipments are generally. kept secret
...how did you find out about this one?
Mapache has a superb intelligence force..
(indicating Mohr)
Organized under the supervision of my
superior officer.
(drinking, laughing)
Gentlemen., we are quite well organized
and well able to pay $10,000 in gold.
(asa they react)
If you are not able to do the work we
will find someone else,
I -- we can do 'it , , ,
But we're going to need special equipment.
Our accountant will arrange everything.
(smiling at Mapache)
Soon you will be the best armed general
in Mexico.
Mapache raises his glass In a toast,
A la conquistat.,.
Pike nudges Lyle who raises his glass; the other men follow
suit. Mohr smiles and elegantly raises a drink.
Prosit:a I
217 PIKE AND DUTCH.DRINK, put down their glasses.
With your permission ...I need a bath.
With my permission -- You all need a
bath.
Well,. .I don't need no bath...Tector
and me need'some of them senoritas.
(to Zamorra)
How 'bout that boy, can you fix us up?
Porque no?
Zamorra yells to JUAN. JOSE, an aide, standing nearby.
Oye!...Traeles unas viejas! Andale!
Gentlemen, you will excuse me, I'm
sure.
I'm sure.
219 DUTCH FOLLOWS PIKE TO ANGEL where they lift him off the
floor.
We better get him cleaned up...
220 MAPACHE CROSSES QUICKLY TO THEM, drawing his gun.
Por favor, General -- but I need him.
I"give you someone much better.
I choose my own... withyour permission.
Zamorra joins Mapache, looks at Pike whose hand is close to
his. gun, turns to the General.
Mi jefe, deje que se lo lleven..
Mapache replaces his gun.
Take him. It is not important to
me -- take him!'
Then he.looks away as:
and LUCHA. Lyle and.Tector turn.and react with delight.
Hey! ...Here come our sweeties!
(laughing softly)
More than enough to go around...
(as one girl sits
on his lap)
And then some!
He turns" and beckons to Pike and Dutch who, with Sykes, are
carrying Angel out of the saloon, but they ignore him.
SCHEDULES. MUNITION SCHEDULES AND NAPS. The other bounty
hunters are scattered around the car grumbling about the
inaction.
And you want to gamble everything this
one shipment will be attacked?!
- --they'll go for.
If?! Why not Juarez?
Because we would have heard::.
(then, patiently)
If they are in Agua Verde they will have
seen Mapache.
And.who in the hell_is Mapache?
A killer for Huerta who calls himself
a.general.-- with enough guns he can
become a power in northern Mexico -
my guess is Pike will try and get
them f or a him.
The train will be guarded by regular
troops!!
Not regulars --.green recruits and not.
worth a damn! I'll need twenty trained
men -- not recruits or this gutter trash
you.'ve given me.
You'll get the job done with what you
have -- that'p our bargain.
(then looking at the
Twenty-four days.
GENTER OF AN ADOBE STEAM HUT. The structure is about twenty-
five feet in diameter with a small. open oven in the center
surrounded by a great deal of rocks. Light comes in through
a tiny hole in the center of the ceiling which also allows
smoke to escape.
PIKE, ANGEL AND DUTCH are sitting on a bench against one
wall. Angel has been cleaned up, but looks beaten.
225 SYKES IS IN ONE CORNER, thoroughly enjoying himself.
The men are all nude and stark white against the mud.' color of
the walls. As the woman exits, Dutch stands and empties a
bucket of water over' himself -and the others. They all gasp
with relief. All have towels around their waists and none
are completely sober. Pike's leg is heavily scarred and he
is in pain. He stands and drinks, gets closer to the fire9
massaging his leg.
I don't see how you stand it
Some day I'm going to build me one of
these and live in it.
(then to Angel)
I don't know why I a didn' t just let him
kill you.
I'm not going to steal guns for that
devil to rob and kill my people again.
Very 'noble .
I didn't see no tears runnin' down your
face when you rode in from San Rafael.
They were not my people -- nor yours --
Mexico.
226 ANGEL GETS UP OFF THE BENCH and dumps a bucket of water on
Then I don't go along!
227 PIKE AND DUTCH LOOK AT ANGEL through the steam.
One load of guns isn't going to stop him
from raiding villages.. You ought to be
thinking about all that money you'll have.
Take them a large bag of gold when it's
over.
A small bag.
Move them a thousand miles away and buy
them a ranch --. two -- three, ranches.
One -- a very Small ranch.
They'll never leave...You see, it's
their land -- and no one will, ever
drive them away.
(sblemnl4),
I'll drink to that sentiment -- and to.
228 IT IS LONG AND NARROW AND SHADOWY and Lyle, Tector and their
He belches, then looks about in awe at the huge casks.
Itm all for them dons'.
229 TECTOR SUDDENLY SWINGS A MATTOX ON TO a six foot cask
which rests on top of two others of equal height, it
bounces out of his hand. He draws his gun and fires as
does Lyle. Liquid gushes down.
229A LYLE STEPS UNDER IT, lifts his face, drinks, then drags:
his lady beside him.
(as the torrent pours
over them removing his
Have a dollop, honey -- there's enough
here for both of us.
And. she does, tasting the good wine:; laughing.
ANGEL PALES.. Both are ready to write Angel off. and forget
about the problem.
Would you give someone a gun to
kill your mother, or your father,
or your brother?
231, DUTCH LOOKS AT PIKE. Pike thinks it over. Both have.
Son -- twenty thousand cuts a lot
of. family ties.
No -- you gringos are no different.
I have seen how Lyle takes care of
his brother.
He takes the bottle, drinks, then throws it on the rocks.
My people don't have guns so Mapache
takes the food out of their mouths
and clothes off their backs. With
guns my village could fight, If I
could take guns to my people I would
go with you -- but not just for
gold,
232 THE MEN ARE MOMENTARILY SILENT. Angel lifts a bucket
of water, spills part of it on his head, passes it to Sykes
who drinks a little of the water, spits it out, puts the
bucket down, pours two bottles of tequilla into it,
drinks. again -- smiles, passes it to Angel, who drinks
and passes it on.
.Al]. we'd need is for El Mapache to
find out we armed some village...
Let him find out.' Mr. Bishop --
(as P i12ke looks
a t\ him )
You know as well as I there ain't no
way of collecting from Mapache 'cept
off a lot of dead bodies -- mostly
ours, the way he thinks.
Pike considers this -- looks at the old man, finally
nods .
I would take guns ...if Mapache found
out, you would say I stole them,
How many cases of rifles did Zamorra
say were in that shipment?
Twenty.
Give him one.
(after a long moment)
You can have one case and one case of
ammo, You'll give up your share of the
gold.
__-He'll have to show up with us. when we
deliver..,.
I' will:..
i. know. you will...
Then. they all turn as:
233 TECTOR AND.LYLE AND THEIR LADIES enter, somewhat wet and
stained with wine.
(awkwardly) '
I' d like. you to meet my fiancee.
(tears in his eyes)
They just got engaged.
234 FOR A MOMENT THE GROUP:is frozen,-looking at the.bride to
be, her bridesmaid and:the best man. and groom,.. then all
stand., together and bow.
Pleasure-, Ma' ain.
Tanto gusto, senorita.
Mucho gusto, senorita..
(softly to himself).
Son of a bitch.
Trot them on in, boys -- I' :m hell on
packin' mules, but I'm 'a delight with,
.a pretty girl.
Tector and Lyle and their girls look at him as both Pike
and Dutch nearly fall off the bench, laughing too hard to
drink their health as we:
WITH BARRELS) DRIVEN BY SYKES. The others are riding.
behind. The walls of the arroyo tower above the men.
Pike is tense in the saddle as the pain in. his leg becomes
almost. unbearable.
You never told me how you got all
tore up like that...
236 PIKE REFLECTS FOR A MOMENT. His face is almost white.;
Then he reaches in his saddle bag and pulls out a bottle.
He drinks, passes the bottle to Dutch..
I met a woman I wanted to marry...
INT. KITCHEN v NIGHT
of groceries and too much to drink.
236C AURORA STANDS WAITING FOR HIM. She is very beautiful and
very angry..
Buenas no the s mi amor.
Aurora swings and catches him full handed across the face9
the groceries scatter on the floor -- Pike bounces off the
wall,. looks at her, tries to grin.
Your husband due back?
No, never you are late -- two days
late.
Pike is startled by this, starts to protest, realizes it is
true, tries to make apologies. Aurora turns and stalks off.
236D -PIKE IS SHOVING POTS AND PANS AROUND, attempting'to cook
dinner, while Aurora sits watching stony faced until he
.turns away, then she can hardly keep from giggling.
You need help?.
No!
He picks up a pan with a hot handle, drops it, spilling hot
stew or soup on his foot, hops around cursing looking at
the shambles on the stove and on the floor.'
236DD AURORA STANDS LOOKING AT HIM WITH LOVE, then smiling softly
crosses to the side-board and pours him a drink. He takes
it, suddenly both are laughing.
Suddenly Pike embraces her and pulls her to the bed. They
begin to make love, then:
THE DOOR SMASHES OUN AND LUKE, a skinny bad mouthed Texan
steps into the room, a_double barreled shot gun in his
hands ready to fire.
AURORA SCREAMS and throws herself in front of Pike. Luke
fires, the charge killing her as Pike dives out of bed --
jumping for his gun on a nearby table.
LUKE FIRES AGAIN, the blast catching Pike across the thigh
and knee. Pike goes down. Luke crosses to the bed and
sits watching him writhing almost bleeding to death on the
floor.
She had a husband and I should have had
enough sense to kill him. He wasn't around
and I got careless. One night he.walked in
on us - - got her with the first shot. He
caught me here with the second then the
damndd coward turned and ran.
You didn't catch up with him?
Not yet but there-hasn't been.a day or an
hour that I haven't thought about getting
him - - he didn't want that woman he just.
wanted to kill somebody - - well, he killed
(Then yelling back)
Move along, Freddy - - we've got a long way
to go:
He turns back to Dutch, takes the bottle,.. drinks deeply and
puts it away.
This is the last go round - - this time
we do it right.
237 A TRAIN CHUGS ACROSS THE FLAT STRETCH of desert. The small
steam. locomotive pushes a flatbed and pulls a succession
of three cars.
Another flat, a passenger and a cattle. The train moves
toward the only object in sight:
THE-FLAT car, wearily checking the track for obstructions.
ON THE SECOND,FLAT CAR TWO MORE ARMED GUARDS sit on crates
of weapons and..arnmunition, gazing at the passing scenery.
The soldiers' horses are roach-maned and unsaddled. I
At one end of the car, the railroad livestock man is asleep
on a pile of straw, an empty jug at his side. The animals
of the bounty hunters are standing saddled, with the cinches
loosened.
244 THE TRAIN SLOWS AND A FEW OF THE SOLDIERS. lift their heads
and look out the windows.
their slumber.
245. THE BOUNTY HUNTERS TENSE.- THORNTON STANDS, looks out...
nothing,' but:
214.6. A RICKETY WATER TOWER AND TINY maintenance shack -- no horses,
wagons, nothing.
214.7 THORNTON TURNS back to his seat.
FIREMAN CLIMBS OUT OF THE CAB AND ONTO THE TENDER. He
reaches up and grabs the lanyard and lowers the spout.
A SAWED-OFF SHOTGUN: HELD BY ANGEL. The fireman gasps
and-takes a step back.
250 ANGEL SLIDES OFF THE SPOUT AND ONTO the tender. He covers
the fireman and the `two man crew. The- crew -urns and Angel
smiles aiid puts his .f_nger to his l 1ps, then gestures. The
firemanand the crew begin to take on grater,
PIKE, DUTCH AND LYLE step out 'from behind the maintenance
shack and climb swiftly onto the tender. Pike slips toward
the engine compartment.
252. DUTCH TURNS TOWARDS THE GUARDS ON THE flatcar behind the
engine.
253 LYLE SCRAMBLES AROUND THE ENGINE TO HANDLE the two men on
the.flat car in front.
He whistles an.d they look up. While he covers them:
255 ANGEL CLIMBS DOWN from the tender onto the flat car over the
crates toward the coupling Joining the flat to the passenger
car.
256 ON THE FRONT FLAT CAR the two- guards turn, freeze as Lyle
25? IN THE CAB, PIKE IS\STANDING WITH his hand on the throttle
25$. AT THE COUPLING -ANGEL GRABS. THE PIN and starts to pull on it.
259 IN THE CAB PIKE. WA TC HESi12 DUTCH , WHO WAVES HIS HAND, motion-
throttle..
263:: THORNTON- FROWNS AS THE CAR moves slightly. He stands, and
the. door, he sees:
263 THORNTON DUCKS BACK AND STARTS TO DRAW HIS . gun,..: pauses and
turns back into the car.' Silently he gestures to the
bounty hunters.
The soldiers in the back of the car continue to sleep as
Thornton and his men move past them toward the horse car.
REACHING THE SERGEANT, still snqring loudly, Thornton hesi-
tates, then decides against it and enters the horse car.
266 THE ENGINE AND. TENDER AND FLAT CAR PULL" SLOWLY away from
268 A 'MAN JUMPING A HORSE OUT OF THE CATTLE CAR. It is one of
the bounty hunters. Another horse quickly follows. Dutch
turns and yells.
They're coming;
269 GORCH ON FRONT OF THE. LOCOMOTIVE WHIRLS AROUND and looks
back for an instant as Dutch yells. The two guards jump
kills both as they pick up their rifles.
TENDER AND THE FLAT CAR, turning in the air, catching the
tender with his hands and his feet precariously balanced
on the coupling.
BACK OF THE TENDER. His feet are bracing him on the bounc-
- ing coupling. He is inches above the rail.
AND GRAB THEIR GUNS. They start .forward.
275 DUTCH LETS GO and, hanging on with one hand, manages to get
his gun out of the holster. He fires blindly over the edge,
IN TAE .CAB, PIKE .AND ANGEL WHIRL at the sound of the shot.
Pike instantly kicks the engineer and fireman out of the
cab, then turns toac'limb onto the tender..
(ahead of him)
Yo V07;
Pike hesitates, then turns back to the throttle.
27.6 DUTCH DUCKS AS SHOTS FROM THE GUARD splinter wood nearh=s
closer to' the rails.
Hurriedly, they enter the cattle car.
279 A3,. THEY REMOVE THEIR HORSES, SOME TRYING to resaddle in
the car.
28.0 DUTCH PULLS THE TRIGGER AND HIS .45 clicks empty..
The other guard panics and scrambles back over the crates.
A second shot catches him in the small of the back, hurling
him over the edge of the car.
283 ANGEL RUSHES FORWARD, and bracing himself on a stanchion,
grabs Dutch by the jacket and pulls him aboard.
284 THE RECRUITS ARE SCRAMBLING around outsi de.the car. Some
are climbing in through the open door. Inside the horses
can be heard kicking and neighing.
Order; Dammit;,..Corporal9 get those
---men out of that car, ..get the animals
(then, looking off)
Corporal -- ride back to the telegraph
at Todos Malos and tell tam that
Pinkerton gang has robbed the train
and we are in pursuit:
As the corporal mounts and rides off, the sergeant .contin"--ns
to watch:
286 THORNTON LEADING HIS MEN IS ABOUT a mile and a half behi^c.
the train.
CROSSES IT AND SUDDENLY the wheels lock. With a shower of
sparks it slides to a stop beside:"
288 A LARGE WAGON ON THE RIVERSIDE OF THE CROSSING. The
bandits scramble off the train and begin loading cases of
guns onto the waiting wagon. Sykes and Tector Gorch assist,
them. The wagon is directly beside the car and the unload-
ing is very rapid.
290 THE CLOUD OF DUST OF THE APPROACHING BOUNTY HUNTERS. He
yells down to the men:
Get the guns off and get on, out of here;
He turns and scrambles down inside the cab.
Outside the men quickly finish loading and the wagon pulls
up alongside the cab.
We're ready!
Not yet - I want to return e. favor..
He.ayanks the throttle into reverse and jumps off the
locomotive onto the wagon.
In the b.g.., the train picks up speed heading back towards
the scene of the robbery.
In perfect order Dutch and Angel begin attaching the ropes
to-the tongue of the wagon as Sykes unhitches.
29li12 WITH ANGEL LEADING, THE..HORSES ARE PULLED into the river.
Large barrels on the side of the wagon serve as floatation
gear. The current catches it and begins to swing it on
the rope downstream and across the river..
295 THE BOUNTY HUNTERS ARE RAPIDLY CLOSING THE GAP. In the
distance. they can see the bandits, now in mid-stream,
296 OUTSIDE THE CATTLE CAR, RECRUITS ARE LINED UP saddling
their horses.
78 e.
Sergeant; They're coming back...
(realizing what is
Get those horses away from the car!.
(running to the car)
Get them out of there;
Which.is now bucking, the saddle hanging under its belly.
The other rears as the Sergeant yells again.
Get out ; ...The engine's coming !
and runs.
THE CAR by the impact.
307 PIKE ROPES ONTO THE' WAGON FROM the front and pulls with
his horse.
308 SYSES IS IN THE DRIVER'S SEAT AND DUTCH is next-to him, lying
prone. on the wagon returning the fire of the bounty hunters.
309 LY'LE AND TECTOR ON HORSEBACK SPUR.up.to the wagon.
Get on those rear. wheels'.
The Gorch brothers scramble down into knee-deep water and
begin to push.
311 A MAN STAGGERS OUT from half cover and drops to his knees,
312 DUTCH FIRES AGAIN and another man drops. The bounty
bank. Then:
314A SEEING THORNTON STARTING ACROSS THE BRIDGE, PIKE raises
to move.
315 THORNTON FORCES his terrified animal across the tottering
he can see:
316 THE CAVALRY DISMOUNTING AND CONTINUING to fire.
317 THE BOUNTY HUNTERS WHIRL around and return the-fire.
But his words are drowned out in a volley-of firing.
Some of the soldiers start for the bridge. Three or
four of the bounty hunters quickly mount and spur on to
the bridge after Thornton.
318 THORNTON FORCES HIS animal forward, stops, recognizing:
319 PIKE AT THE WAGON. PIKE looks at him a moment, then -yells at
his men and pulls the wagon up out of the mud and labor s
up the slope,
320 ANGEL WATCHES THE FUSE BURNING under the bridge toward the
far banks where the bounty hunters are beginning to fall
back to the water:
321 THORNTON FOLLOWED BY THREE OTHER BOUNTY HUNTERS rides forward..
Angel lights the remaining two fuses, mounts and spurs after
Pike and the wagon.
322 SOME OF THE BOUNTY HUNTERS PUSH THEIR HORSES DOWN THE SLOPE Ta-
WARD THE WATER AWAY FROM THE SOLDIERS, who led by McHale, are
closely flanking them. The firing is general now.
323 THE WAGON GOES UP THE RIM OF A GULLY, then down the other
side and out of sight..
324 . IN THE COVER OF THE GULLY, DUTCH AND THE GORCH BROTHERS mount
3 PIKE TURNS HIS HORSE, SPURS BACK THE WAY HE CAME. At the top
325 FIVE STICKS OF DYNAMITE GO OFF in the shallow water on the
bles. A few bounty hunters struggle dawnstream,
326 THORNTON, TWO THIRDS ACROSS THE BRIDGE pulls up, looks back as
327 THE DISTANT FIGURES OF PIKE AND ANGEL. Pike lifts his hat i
a mocking' salute.
BRIDGE EXPLODES, blowing Thornton'and the three bounty
hunters into the river,
Finally both turn and ride after the wagon followed by scat-
tered ineffective shots of the soldiers,
GROUPED ON THE MEXICAN SIDE OF THE RIVER, still wet and dazed
from the river. A huge mesquite wood fire is burning in the
centre of came and several men have placed boots and articles
of clothing around it. Three horses, unsaddled, are tied to
a picket line in the b.g.
Sure would like to get ahold of my fool
horse,
SomeMex kid's probably ridin' him home
right now,
I don't see how I could'a lost both my
boots; .They always was hard as hell
to gat on but that little ole river just
sucked 'em right off;
aThat little ole dynamite helped some,
They was waiting for us.
Dollars to doughnuts that same kid
that's ridin' T.C.'-s horse is wearing
your-boots right now,
He-drops it onto the sand and stamps on it. The men watch9
silent, but slightly amused,
What do you reckon we ought'a do now?.
.,.Go back?..,Them soldiers was shooting
at us,
You see Thornton;.,. I never did see him
come up',
See him;... I was with him; But I never
seen him come up either,.
If you'reaasking me, I think we ought'a
go after them bandits and make that swim.
worth something.
(the fourth
bounty hunter)
I'd like to take some good pelts
back.. or at least maybe steal
something down here.
----Why go back at all -- just rob
every Mez' we see.
You don't know this country -- step
out of line and every Mex you see will
be shooting your ass full of holes.
T. Co
Well, I'm sure as hell going to steal
me a horse;
333 THORNTON IS STANDING ON THE EDGE OF THE CLEARING looking at
the men around the f ire. He is tired and has obviously ridden
a long way, and shows the affects of the explosions ripped
clothes, a bloody gash on his face -- a twisted knee that is
bad enough to make him limp through the remainder of the film.
Steal as some grub -- I got the
horses.
33. THE MENWHIRL AROUND AT THE s o and of Thornton' s voice,
Hey... you find my horse;
.We thought the dynamite must've got
you or them . soldiers.
Or that damned river.
"Them soldiers" are going to get us all
if they ever get the chance...Who
started firing at them?
The men look at one another momentarily.
Well, Old Huey started firing up.at
tem. I even tried to stop him...
Then one of them bandits nailed him
from across the river,
Them soldiers started shooting first:
Thornton, without answering, steps to the fire,
How many rifles? And how much
ammunition?
(as they look)
Got mine...damn little...twelve
rounds.azItm clean,..44ts but no
301 30 t s, . - . I}O round - lost mine.
We'll use what we got.
Are we going after-them?
We are; -- unless youtd like to go
back. and face a firing squad.
How, in-hell am I goin' to fight
without boots?
Your problem.
Saddle up -- we're riding out..'
In the b.g., a horse whinnies as the men look at him dumb-
founded.
Now...?
And they jump as we:
Lyle; .Put your horse in the traces!
336 LYLE HANDS A BOTTLE OF WHISKEY TO TECTOR and nudges his horse
forward.-As he swings off, it is obviaeas that he is a little
drunk,
And you better dry out -- we got no
cause to celebrate.
Well, we got all them guns,. Pike.
And we got a hell of a long way to go
'with a considerable number of people
just waiting to take 'em away.
Where's the General supposed to meet
us? -
Agua Verde -- or before -- and when he
What about Thornton and them others?
Last I saw he was ridin' four sticks of
dynamite into the river.
Don't count on him stayin' t.ere.
- (as Pike looks at him)
You know him --.I know him he'll
be along.
Yeah he'll be along.
338 HE CROSSES SLOWLY TO HIS HORSE, his weariness showing, puts
his foot in the stirrup, hesitates.
140 PIKE STEPS UP INTO THE SADDLE, the pain twisting his face.
For- a long moment no one moves, then:
LYLE FULLS. A BOTTLE out of his. jumper, hands it to Pike. 34-
Pike drinks, hands it'to Sykes who drunks, hands it to Angel
who drinks,. hands it with a touch of a smile to Tector who
hesitates, then half grins himself; drinks and hands it to
Lyle. Lyle looks at the bottle, upends it over his mouth, a
few drops spill out into his mouth, looks at the bottle in
disbelief, tosses it gently aside.
(to Pike , simply)
It'll be a cold day in hell 'fore
-I do that again. -
And suddenly they are all laughing.
Let's move.-
And they do, still chuckling-as we.;
342 A TELEGRAPH'OPERATOR SNAPS AWAKE as a message comes over the
wire..-. As the machine clicks, he diligently writes the mes-
sage. When he is, finished he hands it to JUAN, a' small.: boy .
who` is dressed in a poorly fitting uniform. -
Porel generalisimo: Andale!
The boy runs out of the building and into the street.
343 MANY UNIFORMED SOLDIERS ARE DEPLOYED AROUND THE TRAIN while
they load horses into old boxcars -- also loading are:
OTHER. CIVILIANS who are. part of Mapache's encampment, Most
climb'on top. of the box cars where they set up housekeeping..,.
building f ires, ' cooking food -- ignoring the sporadic rifle.
fire that is beginning to grow in volume as
345 THIRTY' OR FORTY BIG HATTED REVOLUTIONARIES probe for the
END OF THE TRAIN where:
347 MAPACHE'STANDS LOOKING OVER THE NEARBY HILLS with field
hit and falls dying.
Mi general -- tenemos que irnos.'
Par favor.
Mapache ignores them.
Juan,arushing'toward Mapache, almost falls as Herrera jerks
him to a halt..
Telegrama de San Antonio para su
exaelencia, el general. (A telegram
from San"Antonio for his excellency,
the General.)
(reaching for the
Yo to llevo;
347A JUAN PULLS IT AWAY. HERRERA.GRINS, and. understanding his
wish to: deliver it personally, steps aside. Juan runs to
Mapache, skids to a halt and salutes.
Mi General... telegrama de San Antonio.
The general returns the salute solemnly and opens the paper,
reads it.
Los-gringos se robaron el tren;
(to his companion,
Was sagt er?
Mohr smiles. Mapache is obviously pleased. He looks up at
the Germans.
The gringos take the guns...
Sie haben die Geware gestclen!
Ach so;...Gut -
Sehr gut.mein General!
(indicating the
approaching Villistas)
It is important this news be kept
from Villa until the guns are in
our hands.
(beginning to panic
as the firing grows
We must go:
(shouting towards
the mountain in
The next time I will. destroy you
(turning to Herrera;
in Spanish)
Send men immediately to meet the
guns on the road to Agua Verde --
take possession and return here.
And if the gringos object --?
Kill them.
(in English)
My General -- if they are success
ful in this venture possibly they
can be useful in others,
Mapache thinks this over, turns to Herrera. Nearby another
man is hit and falls.
(in Spanish)
Bring them back with you -- over-
come their objections -- reason
with them - convince them of our
good intentions.
HERRERA in Spanish)
And if they still object?
MAPACHE. (in Spanish)
Kill them;
3?+8 HERRERA SALUTES AND LEAVES. Mapache gestures:and the others.
quickly jump aboard the train. Mapache is the last, looking,
back at the hills with hatred as the Villistas charge and
we:.
349 DUTCH IS LYING PRONE BEHIND SOME ROCKS trying a paper cone
over the front of a pair of U.S. Army binoculars. Pike
stands beside him, With the cone adjusted he rolls over and
looks out across the valley plain broken with arroyos.
Still heading east.
Are they bluffing. or did they
really miss it?
I'd say they missed it..
(i 351. DUTCH AND PIKE SNAKE BACK FROM THE LIP OF THE ROCKY hill that
352 THE WAGON IS BELOW THEM hidden in a gully. The other men
are lounging underneath it. Pieces of brush are tied behind
the rear wheels of the wagon to brush away the trail. Pike
and Dutch stand and move back toward the wagon.
Only five left -- didn't figure
them to come down after us. How
much can we be worth?
A lot depends on how hungry they
are...
You- stay up there and look for
bighats.,..I'm going to start.
..'rigging the fireworks.
Dutch: turns, crawls back and lifts the glassese Pikewalk
down near the wagon and. prods. Angel., who.is sleeping _:
his boot.
1. need some-help.
353 ANGEL QUICKLY GETS TO HIS FEET and follows Pike. to the
wagon. Pike reaches into a box near the seat and removes
a piece of fuse.
Get that case of explosives near
the back.
Angel climbs on the wagon. Lyle, hearing him,.crawls out
from underneath. His brother also awakens and starts moving
around. Sykes, hat. over his eyes, looks up but doesn't move..
Whatta you want with the dynamite?
Protection.
(as they look at
I figure the General will plan to
collect without payment, then kill
us if we have. any objections. The
only reason he might change his
mind is if something could happen
to these guns.
Angel hands Pike a case of explosives.
Now I'm goin' to make it real
easy for something to happen.
35L PIKE SETS THE BOX ON THE GROUND and pries open the lid. He
begins setting the sticks on the ground next to the box.
Angel gets down and Pike hands.him a coil. of baling wire.
Wrap these in pairs and put a
fuse cap between them.
Angel takes the first two and starts to work on them.
355 LYLE WATCHES FOR A MOMENT THEN NUDGES HIS BROTHER and climbs
356 ANGEL AND PIKE ARM THE DYNAMITE STICKS in the shade of the
wagon..
Men from my village will meet
us tomorrow.
Pike looks up, angered.
You told them about our trail?
I. don't need to tell them...They
know where we are.
How?
Angel puts the charge down and looks off at the horizon.
This country has many people, but
they have learned to live without
being seen.
(aftera moment)
Anyplace where a farmer has a field
...or a man has sheep in the moun-a-
.tains..or a boy watches a herd of
goats.
- There is a noise off screen and they both look up,
357 TECTOR AND LYLE, using the heavy-bladed Bowie knives, have
Pike -- take--a look --
-You know how to work one of
these things?
Pike stands,,then grins a little-and crosses to the wagon.
.Whatever I don't know, I'm
going to learn.
359 THE BOUNTY HUNTERS NOW IN AN AREA OF BADLANDS have stopped
on a small rise and are looking out over miles of the same
type of country.
I don't know how we lost 'em
except maybe in that big valley
where the ground was. so hard.
There wasn't but one way they
could have taken a wagon out
of there, this here is it.
They didn.'t take it out...
We, ain't gonna make it too much
further without something to eat.
We didn't lose them -- I could
point to them now.
(as they whirl,
looking around)
Sit still, dammitl
(as they quiet)
You think Pike and old Sykes haven't
been watching us -- you think if we
hadn't.turned off they wouldn't just
have sat back and let us walk into
it -- six of them hid and all the.
guns.and ammunition they need -- you
think I wasn't sweating blood they
wouldn't try and hide their trail!
They look at him silently, almost frightened by his vehemeno e
They know what this is all about --
and. what. do I have -- nothin' but
you damned egg sucking chicken
stealing gutter rats -- with less
than 60 rounds of ammunition be-
tween you,
Listen, Mr. Thornton -- I don't
have to take any talk like that.
I don't neither;
You'll take it! You don't even
have enough sense to keep your
damned boots on.
(then, quietly)
We're after men' -- and I wish to
God I was with them.
(after a moment)
You make any more mistakes and
I'm going to ride off and let
you die.
They are silent looking at the ground -- after a moment,
Thornton turns his horse and rides off slowly. They follow.
Showing the wagon moving into a deep arroyo. Pike is now
driving.
361 SYKES IS AT THE REINS OF THE WAGON, PIKE BESIDE HIM. The
horses are at a walk. Angel, Dutch'are mounted,. the Goruh
brothers are lying on top of the wagon, one on each side of
a bulky tarp-covered object.
(looking off)
Hold up 1..
SOME DISTANCE AWAY. Seeing the wagon, they pull up.
363 PIKE SLIDES INTO THE FRONT SEAT NEXT TO..SYKES.. Without a
word,. Sykes lights his cheroot and Pike. reaches behind him
and takes the end of a fuse.
Angel and Dutch let their rifles drift over.
Mapache' s?
Just hope. they don't belong to
Villa.
(Note: He speaks English, but. badly, very badly)
Ho.lal...We are friends...We are
from. -el generalisimo Mapac hie;
Tell that one in front to come. over
here ...Alone!
Oyel Jefe, ven to solitol
The Mexican turns to his companions for a short discourse.
Then he turns and. rides toward the men on the wagon.
I.coming,..We are friends...
all of us...I bring love and
affection from el general --
We are comrades -- you and he
-- all of us.
365 PIKE, DUTCH AND THE OTHERS watch silently as he rides up to
the wagon.
366 HERRERA STOPS AND REMOVES HIS HAT', smiles, looks at. the
heavily loaded wagon.
Que bueno -- What bravery you.
have.to have done this magnifi
cent act for the liberty of
Mexico.
Angel laughs, spits, Herrera.looks at him for a moment,
smiles, shrugs, turns to Pike.
I am to escort you to the general.
367 NOBODY ANSWERS AND NONE OF THE GUNS pointed at him are
lowered, he seems undisturbed.
Tell me what is you wish?
(to Dutch)
Tell him to-come closer!
I hear -- I am coming,- my friend.
369 HERRERA STILL GRINNING BROADLY edges his horse closer to
the wagon.. Pike holds the burning end of the cheroot about
an inch from the fuse.
370 HERRERA SEES THE FUSE AND QUICKLY follows it back to the
371 THE WHOLE WAGON IS RIGGED TO BLOW, dynamite and fuse all
Itts-a: very fast fus.e..,any
trouble and no guns for the
general.
Herrera is solemn as he ponders for a moment, then begins
to 'smile.
Heyl...very smarts:: That's
very smart for you-damn gringos...
So nobody can rob the guns!
Nobody:..nunca nadiel
(after a moment)
Don't you think you should tell
your soldiers?
The Mexican makes a face as if he doesn't understand.
Why? I am not afraid,,,they
are not afraid -- you blow up
the wagon you die -- or we
kill you pretty soon -- but
we are amigos __
Now,
Show.him&
373 TECTOR AND LYLE JERK THE TARP OFF. TI MACHINE GUN. Lyle
arms it.
371k. HERRERA. LOOKS AT THE GUN and his eyes widen. He. turns,
Oyen muchachos3,.,Tienen la
.caretta como bomba.con unfisible;
,,.y machina38
Still smiling he turns back to Pike and Dutch.
El general. waits an Agua-Verde..,
to meet with you,
Go on back-and tell the General
that one of us will. be there
tomorrow for-the trade..1,any
trouble -- no gunsb
Herrera takes one last look at the guns. then he wheels his
horse and. rides off.
375 PIKE TURNS. TO THE OTHERS AS THEY begin to relax.
This isnAt over yeti
376 HERRERA RIDES HIS HORSE TO THE BEND IN. THE RIVER then,
reaching his men,areins his horse up and-turns him around.
He whistles loudly and calls out :
Muchachos...
377 FIFTY SOLDIERS FROM HIDDEN POSITIONS ON TOP OF BOTH sides of
the arroyo ride out and look down.
(after a.moment, laughing)
All the soldiers whirl and ride away.:
379 PIKE AND THE MEN breathe a sigh'of relief as. the Mexicans.
ride off . ,
(to Angel and Dutch)
Ride ahead a hundred yards and check
the washes...
(to Tector)
You and I will cover the flanks --
(to Lyle)
Keep on the gun -- watch the rim.
(as Pike steps off the
Give sue that cigar --
(.as Pike does)
Anything moves, I blow her sky high.
(sittinag up)
Listen, old man
I'll tell you when --
THORNTON 9 COFFER AND T . C. are down behind some rocks.
Thornton is looking DOWN THE ARROYO with binoculars while-
Coffer covers the glasses with his hat.
Movin' fast -- looks like they bluffed
off about 50 federal es --
(then sliding back)
Why due east?
(as Coffer shrugs)
Well, let's go find out.
(trying to conceal his hate)
Beggin' your pardon, Mr. Thornton --
but our stock needs water and grain --
and. so do we.
(after a moment)
I don't give a damn about you -- but
I.. do about the stock.
He turns and slides down. the bluff. Coffer and T.C. look at
each. other, then follow.
382. SUDDENLY TO AN OWL.'S CALL. He rises and crosses to Pike,
who is sitting near a tree with a rifle across his lap.
There is rjo fire, but enough. moonlight to see.
My people are here for the guns.
Pike looks at him then looks around the camp.
Where?
Angel smiles, then turns and calls softly.
Ignacio?...Quien hablas por mi pueblo?
Distinctly Indian voices answer from the surrounding tangled
undergrowth.
Si Angeleit o ...Soy Ignacio -a- Ya estamos 1
383 PIKE AND THE OTHERS MOVE INTO COVER, their guns coming out.
Lyle in the wagon traverses the machine gun.
(to the others)
They have come for the guns.
We haven't heard from Tectnr..
(from the shadows.)
Call-'em in.
Vengan, Muchachos
then suddenly:
385 A PEASANTS DRESSED IN WHITE is standing near the thicket.
Lyle and Sykes turn.
386 ANOTHER IS STANDING BEHIND THEM. Then:
BOUND BETWEE[1 THEM. As they enter the clearing, they
politely remove their hats. Soon there are five, two of
them are leading a 'small donkey. Angel crosses to them as
they group in the center of the clearing. All carry
machetes.
(his gun out, still
hidden in the shadows)
Cut him loose
388 ANGEL SPEAKS, LED BY IGNACIO, THEY QUICKLY FREE TECTOR and
hand him his weapons with murmured apologies. Tector looks
at them, whistles, softly.
Never saw anything like it -- never
heard Iem, never saw 'em..
(to Pike)
They apologize and ask you to forgive
them for their lack of trust but only
by caution do they remain alive --
Hell, I forgive them! I just want to
join 'em!
389 PIKE JOINS DUTCH AND THEY WATCH quietly.. They have mis-
trusted people for so long themselve,g they can understand
mistrust in others. Freddy Sykes laughs s.oi'tly.
390 ANGEL AND THE INDIANS cross to the wagonE:
(climbing on the -wagon)
Lievasauna caja de rifles.
(Take a case of rifles.)
(crossing to him)
Don't break that fuse...
Angel lifts a crate.
I won't.
Pike looks at Ignacio waiting to take the crate, the man's
machete glints in the moonlight.
They part of your village?
They are part of the village but not
from it -- they are puro indio --
and these mountains belong to them.
How long have they been around?
What ?
How long have they been following us...
close?
391 ANGEL EASES THE RIFLE CRATE DOWN, TWO PEONS TAKE IT. He
turns to Ignacio.
Cuanto tiempo nos sigas?
The Indian begins a big explanation in a dialect only Angel
understands.
Desde ante ayer, cuando salli-eron de la
llanura grande. Hey otros.grupo de
gringos... ellos se fueron a uno Ranchito.
Pike looks at Angel.
They've been. with us since we left the
big plain...He says those others went
to a little. Ranch.
(joining them)
Ever see anyone that could sneak around
, like these S
Angel uncovers a case of munitions and hands it down,
They fought-'paches for a thousand
years -- that's a sure way to .learn..
If they ever get armed and led, this
whole country'll go up in smoke.
That it will, son, that it will.
392 THE INDIANS ROPE THE TWO CASES ON THE BURRO. They work
smoothly, each man knowing his job. Angel. climbs down off
the wagon, murmurs a farewell to Ignacio and the others, and
they disappear into the shadows.
39LE. MAPACHE AND HIS MEN are playing with fireworks while they
wait for the guns.
ANGEL'S VILLAGE). One of them waves aloft a shotgun and
tells Mapache that it belonged to the man.. Mapache, com-
pletely absorbed in lighting a Roman candle, answers without
turning.
Matalo l Pues l.. .
-(Then kill him!)
As he dies, Mapache lights the Roman candle and shoots it
into the air, then at tha soldiers who run for cover,
398 THE GENERAL SEES PIKE AND CROSSES TO HIM IMMEDIATELY, laugh-
ing with pleasure. Mohr and the other-.Germans run to: join
him: as does Zamorra and Herrera.
Gringo 1. You bring the- guns l
Ya estan los gringos y las armas l`
(The gringos are here with the guns i)
(then noticing the wagon
is nowhere in sight)
(to Zamorra).
Donde estan las arthas?
Zamorra looks up at Pike.
The guns?
Don't worry we got ' em...hidden. As
soon as I. get 'my share of the gold
I'll tell you where four cases are...
$2500 worth..
The others are waiting at the wagon
and unless I r eturn pretty damn quick
they. blow it.
'Zamorra smiles, admiring Pike's caution.
You fix it pretty damn good. You
fool Mel
Our accountant will pay you immediately.
Zamorra turns and yells to Herrera.
Trae la caja!
(Bring the strong box!)
When you come with all my guns?
Quicker I get back, the quicker the
next load'll get here.
399 HERRERA BRINGS A SMALL WOODEN STRONG BOX. Kneeling on the
ground he opens it and counts out two small bags of gold,
and hands them to Zamorra. Zamorra hands them to Pike.
About two.. miles up the arroyo ... three
cases of rifles, one of ammunition,
are in the brush behind it.
(to Herrera)
Trae las armas
Herrera runs for his horse.
I understand you have a machinegun
Our contract was 16 cases of rifles
and 8 of ammunition -- for $10,000 --
not a machine gun.
Zamorra translates this for Mapache who beams at Pike. with
genuine pleasure.
(meaning it)
_dinero -- muchachas bonitas --
la vida dulcet
The General wishes you to join
him. -- and become rich he
respects you.
(turning to go)
I'll think it over.
Esperate.
'Wait, por favor...In case he
cant find them.
(to Pike in
(to Zamorra)
I trust him.
Zamorra shrugs, Pike grins then turns and rides out..
SHOW Tector Gorch leaning on the wagon grinning.
They are in,.a small shallow depression
between two hills.. High enough to provide a vantage
point of the village and the surrounding area--- hidden
enough by brush and broken country to provide maximum
cover.
402 SYKES SEATED NEAR THE ROCK picks glass shards from his
clothes, turns to Tector.
(after a moment)
Pike must have found you. under a
rock somewheres.
You going to whip me?
Nope - But you better hope I don't
get riled enough to start . ggin'
you when this is over.
You'll never get a chance to dry
gulch me, old man.
(grinning at him)
We'll see.
(to' Tector)
403 DUTCH, CAREFULLY EXAMINING TWO GRENADES, looks up as Te c for
Gorch. moves up the bank of the wash.
(crossing to Dutch)
He's been gone a 1 ong time
(then.)
What's t ha t? .
Grenade -a you pull this pin then
throw it and find a hole- From
what. I hear it gets the job done.
We could have used a fear of them
in San Rafael..
(calling).
Pike's co min 1
404 DUTCH GETS TO HIS FEET, putting the grenades in his jumper
pocket and crosses. to meet Pike, as he rides in.
{.calling)
Any trouble?
Just carryin' all this weight.
He hold's up two bags of gold.
He' gate it a...Look,. Lyle, he's carryin'
golds Pike -- I want to go next..
(to Lyle)
You and your brother take in the
next' load, and the machine gun -
'then Dutch and Angel. Sykes,. you
follow them and pick up the pack
horses...leave the wagon.
How's the, generalis imo?
Openin' boxes. like he thinks it's
Christmas.
406 MAPACHE WAITS AS TWO MEN BRING HIM THE MACHINE GUN, the
weapon cradled between them. Zamorra awkwardly feeding a
belt into the breech,. finally gets it ready to fire. The two
Germans are watching with amusement and disdain. In the b.g,f
Lyle and Te.ctor are. riding out the gate.
It must be mounted on the tripod...
Mapache ignores them,.' grabbing the butt of the gun.
Er ist dock verrukt
The gun suddenly.comes alive and the two men holding it are
bounced around the area by the wild. reco it .
408. THE GUN SWINGS WILDLY, MAPACHE HANGING ON -= his finger
locked down. on the trigger.
409 THE GERMANS. AND OTHER BYSTANDERS DIVE FOR COVER as bullets
clatter- through the area-. Finally the two soldiers, 'unable-.
to support it, let it drop to the ground.
continues firing. Now like a rivet gun driving bullets
into the earth,
411 DUTCH AND ANGEL ENTER THE COURTYARD. Mapache, Zamorra and
Herrera watching the Germans mount the. gun on the tripod,
turn; then Herrera crosses to his horse and mounts, waiting.
We brought the last of it.
who opens theca -- locks - it's gold.
Zamorra speaks to Herrera, who rides off with ten or twelve
soldiers.
(turning to go)
You can keep the wagon - we'll
take the horses.
Como no...?
TENSES. A group of soldiers are beginning to slowly close
the massive iron gates.
How many cases did you take 'from
the train?
Fourteen. We lost two on the trail.
(laughing, points at
Angel; in Spanish)
He stole them. ..He stole them for his
people. The mother of his girl told us.
I lost the girl, so now she gives me an
Angel.
APPROACHES,. THE HEAVY WROUGHT IRON DOORS begin to swing shut..
No lo matez b...Lo quiero vivo
into the wrought iron gate.
A group of soldiers pick him up and drag him back.
416 DUTCH SITS ON HIS HORSE UNMOVING, apparently unconcerned as
Angel is brought before Mapache.
Supieron ellos?
No S...Yo los robe mientras dormian.
(.to Dutch)
Ee took two cases when you were asleep...
418 MAPACHE LAUGHS, highly pleased at the idea of a Mexican
robbing the Americans.
(to Angel, in Spanish)
Next time be more careful who you shoot
-- the mother of your sweetheart became
angry when you killed her daughter. --
so she betrayed you -- que fam-ilia, eh? CONTINUED
(interrupting him)
I'm wasting time here.
(turning to him).
Y Angel?
He's a thief,-- you take care of him.
(gesturing at the gold)
Dame lo.
Wiat for? l We delivered.
Two cases short -- one bag, por favor.
419. DUTCH THINKS ABOUT THIS VERY. BRIEFLY, then tosses him a bag.
Un vieje Bien..
Yeah.
He turns and rides off, Angel watching him.
They got Angel... some people would betray
their mothers for two dollars and one drink.
Unhitch and bring the horses - leave the wagono
We got to get him out.
How -- ?
But. Sykes can't answer and Dutch rides off.
distance.
The others are. mounted at the bottom of a small ravine below
him.
(turning to them)
Dutch Engstrom...going from the village.
$1000 dead or alive.
Bet they sold the guns.
,,-Coming out one at a time.
i (then, crossing to his horse)
We'll get down at the bottom of the wash
and see if we can thin the odds a little.
He mounts and they ride off.
On a ridge above camp, using binoculars, they look across the
badlands below and at the town far in the distance.
Well, he had guts --
We're just lucky he didn't talk.
Yeah - he played his string out right
to the end.
He loved that girl!
Her own Mama turning him in -- just like
Judas --
423 PIKE LOOKS AT HIM A LONG MOMENT, then turns away.
How in hell. can we do that? They
got guns and 200 men.-.. Besides,
chances are he's dead by now.
_-No wag... no' way at all.
There's Sykes.
trots up the dim trail. toward the hideout.
1 27 THORNTON AND HIS HUNTERS, THREE. M O WATCH from the
the trail.
431 THORNTON CURSES AND RUNS TO HIS HORSE as the bandits open
fire.
PINPOINTS OF LIGHT APPEAR IN THE ROCKS ABOVE HIM. After a
moment the noise of firingareaches them.
.Dutch takes the glasses, watching.
433 THORNTON AND THE OTHERS SPUR after Sykes, firing.
434 THEN SYKES IS HIT and falls forward over the horse's withers.
435 THE BOUNTY HUNTERS THUNDER after Sykes.
(yelling).
I got him -- I got him.'
Thornton is silent, his face bitter.
436 PIKE GRABS THE GLASSES,. WATCHES THE BOUNTY HUNTERS ride after
Sykes.
,Maps the ?
Thornton - they got Sykes. He's hit bad.
Daum Deka Thornton to hell..
What. would you do in his place.
gave his word.
(turning on him,
almost yelling)
Gave his word to a railroad.
It'-9 his word2
That ain.'t what counts -- it's who you
give it t o l l
(as Pike doesn't answer)
We kin stay right up here and kick
hell out of 'em.
Pike turns and. looks over the camp.
No water.
Make a run for the border?
They'd be after us every step of
the way -- I know Thornton. No,
I'm tired of being hunted -- we go
back to Agua Verde and let the
General take,.. care of those boys.
You're'cra-zy:...He'd just as soon
kill us as break wind..
He's so tickled with the guns
he'll be celebrating for a week
and happy to do us a favor.
Thornton ain't going after us in
there. While they're busy pick-
ing over Freddy) we'll.'
take the back trail off this
mountain and head for town.
The others look at him silently. Finally:
We take our gold?
We take one sack to pay our way.
437 THE BOUNTY HUNTERS CRASH through the brush into a small
clearing, then split up, looking for tracks. The country
around them is a maze of rocks and thick mesquite and
chaparral. Sykes' horse, blood running. down its flanks,
is standing in the clearing,-grazing.
He can't be far.
Lots of blood over here -- then
it stops and no tracks.
We'11 find him. Ten dollars says
he's dead by now.
.It'll take us a day to find him if
he is -- if he isn't, he's holding
a gun on us right now.
438 THE IAN TENSE,-THEIR WEAPONS coming up.
We'll go after the others.
Just leaving him here? He's worth
money.
(softly, bitterly)
Jess, you come back tomorrow and
watch the buzzards. They'll show
you where he is -- you might even
get a pair of. boots.
Jess thinks this over and grins, then the smile fades.
But what if he ain't dead?
Your problem..
He turns his horse and rides away,. the others following,
439 SYKES, HIDDEN IN THE ROCKS and brush above them,aslowly
lowers his rifle and sags back. His leg is dark with dried
blood and he's weak. Around the wound is a crude bandage
made from his shirt -- with a tourniquet twisted tightly
above it. After a moment, there is a noise and he looks
away at:
AGAINST THE RAYS of the late afternoon sun, a machete
dangling from his hand.
PIKE AND THE OTHERS NOW MOUNTED, look over the camp.
If I. didn't bury it, I wouldn't know
where to look.
Come on.
They ride off. Fora longmoment the clearing is quiet,then:
443. ENERO, A YOUNG MEXICAN BOY steps out of the brush.
MAPACHE'S SOLDIERS ARE HAVING A VICTORY CELEBRATION in:tha
courtyard of the hacienda. A fire:is burning and pigs and
goats are. being barbecued.
445 MAPACHE, ZAMORRA AND THE GERMANS are sitting at the table..
446 TWO SOLDIERS LEAD ANGEL (who has been badly beaten) down into
the courtyard. His hands are tied, and he is, stumbling with
fatigue. They tie a long rope from his neck to. the pack
saddle of a donkey. One of.the soldiers calls.to Mapache.
Yaalisto, mi General!
447 MAPACHE.GETS UP FROM THE TABLE and crosses to the area where.
join him.
448 THE. SECOND SOLDIER steps to the animal and leads it at a run
around the. courtyard, Angel dragging behind it. Mapache and
the'others watch without expression.
L. 4:8A PIKE' AND DUTCH AND THE GORCH BROTHERS dismount and enter,
449. THEY MOVE INTO THE COURTYARD AND STOP, watching the animal
dragging Angel around. Finally. the soldiers. and animal stop,
exhausted, in a
corner of the yard and the soldiers return to their party
atmosphere. Angel lies unmoving.
I hate to see an animal treated like
that.
No more than. I do 0
Maybe we- could buy him.
They are silent for a long moment. Finally:
Just thinking about him is asking
.for trouble.
We,could use another gun.
450 MAPACHE, ZAMORRA AND THE GERMAN ADVISORS NOW GROUPED around
the fire see the men.
Los Bandi'dos Gringos...Come here,
451 PIKE AND THE OTHERS PUSH THROUGH the large group of festive
Mexicans towards the table. As they walk toward Mapache:
452 ANGEL IS DRAGGED PAST THEM by two soldiers and dropped in
front of the general.
You come for your friend?
Pike and the others stop.a few feet away.
I want to buy him back...
Dutch and the others look at him surprised,
I,'11 pay you his share of the gold.
We kept his share of the gold.
Oyen muchachos...'.Quiere comprar
el traidor este ;
- (Listen boys...He wants to buy
this traitor)
The soldiers respond with laughter.
How much?...He don't look. wotth too
much...Levantasel
Two men jerk Angel to his feet. He is groggy and unre=
sponsive.
Maybe he won't live too long'.
I'll give half my share to get him
back.
453 MAPACHE TURNS AWAY and mumbles something to Zamorra.
You've had your fun with him...
(cutting him. off)
El g3neralisimo is happy with victory!...
Zamorra grabs a bottle of tequilla ofd' the table and tosses
it to Pike.
Go and drink... .there are women in.
the village...But don't be foolish.
and change his mood.
454 PIKE HOLDS THE BOTTLE and looks at the table, seething with
anger. Then,. suddenly he calms.
Want to go hunting, General?
Mapache looks at him confused.
(pointing)-
Five government men out there -
Policio - they want the guns back.
Mapache turns to Zamorra who translates..
(to Herrera happily,
in Spanish)
Five gringos want to take our guns
Maten los..
S , mi. General. f.
He turns,'barks orders to his men, then mounts and rides out,
followed by twenty soldiers.
Goodbye,. Thornton.
455 ZAMORRA GESTURES AND JUAN JOSE crosses. to them...
Quieren muchachas?
Pike looks at Angel for a moment, then turns away..
Why not?.
The group moves through the celebration out the main gate
and into the village beyond.
HIS GLASSES as his men search the area behind and. below him.
Don't look like nobody was ever. here,
(pointing at horse tracks)
Well, they was.
Then they look up as:
458 PIKE IS SPRAWLED OVER A NATIVE HAMMOCK, drunk.. He lifts a
bottle of mescale and takes a drink.
459 ON THE FLOOR OF THE HUT A SAD BUT NOT UNATTRACTIVE WOMAN is
sitting looking at a handful of silver in her hand. In one
corner a baby whines as the flies bother it.
Through an open door leading to another room,.the drunken
voices of the Gorch brothers can be heard as they bargain
with DELORES, a very reluctant prostitute.
You said dos for two.
'cause y ou did real well, honey.
Doce -- es mas que dos dace para cada
uno. _
joining room.
461. LYLE GORCH LOOKS UP AT HIM BLEARILY FROM A HAMMOCK. Tector is
on the floor embracing the disheveled woman.
Pike watches them, weaving a little:
Let's get Angel...
462 TECTORaIMMEDIATELY REACHES.FOR HIS GUN and stands as if he
has just been given an important order by a commanding offi-
cer. Lyle rises more slowly, begins to check the.-loads in
his pistols.
Why not?
Pike turns and moves through. his room. Tector and Lyle follow.
Behind them the.woaian begins her complaints again.
SITTING WITH A'BOTTLE BACK AGAINST THE WALL listening. to the
plaintive sound of a distant guitar.. He.looks up as they
come out.
Angel?...
Yeah.
464 THEY CROSS TO THEIR HORSES, THEIR DRUNKENNESS LESSENING with
every step.
Pike and Dutch pull rifles. or shotguns from their saddle scab-
bards as do . Lyle.and-Tector,. then they move up the village
street..
STRONG around them that as they pass through the celebrating
soldiers, the song and the laughter begin to die.
466 MAPACHE, THE GERMANS, ZAMORRA, HERRERA AND SIX OR SEVEN of
their officers and a handful of women are seated-at a long
center table.. Food and liquor bottles are spilled every-
where, the mariachi band plays for:
466A CHITA, A SCARED, NOT UNATTRACTIVE GIRL who is trying to
please the general by dancing on the table.
At other tables are more officers and perhaps thirty or so
enlisted men. The machine gun mounted on its tripod is in a
far corner..
467 ANGEL LIES ON THE FLOOR, nearly unconscious, almost unrecog-
468 PIKE AND THE OTHERS ENTER THROUdH THE LARGE ARCHES and s. 'and
watching.
(half angry)
Hey, bandidos? What you want?.
Hey, this
(pointing to Herrera)
Dog lost those gringos you wanted -
but.we kill 'em tomorrow -- naw. you
go on and get out of here;
We want Angel;
Mapache stares at them without answering.
You are very stupid...very stupid!
rising. -
470 PIKE WATCHES UNMOVING AS MAPACHE PROPS up Angel from behind,
grins at them.
You want him..,?
471. ANGEL-BARELY ABLE TO STAND, REACTS with disbelief..
472 PIKE AND DJTCH WATCH without a movement, without a sound.
Take him...
473 TECTOR AND LYLE IGNORE MAPACHE, THEIR eyes drifting over the
Mexicans who are slowly edging forward,some beginning to grin.
474 ZAMORRA, STILL SEATED at the table pours himself a drink,
the clink of the glass against the bottle loud in the
silence. Beside him the.Germans rise slowly.
Mapache, still holding Angel from behind, leans over his
shoulder and whispers in his ear:
Vete, Angelito:..te esperan. los.
gringitos...
475 ANGEL STANDS FAST, then curiously he takes a step forward.
477 ANGEL'S FACE BEGINS to brighten with hope and he takes
another step,. then:
478 MAPACHE GRABS HIM.BY THE HAIR and his other hand flashes
across the boy's throat as he shoves Angel-into the Americans,
the blood splattering them from his severed throat.
.479 AS PIKE STEPS BACK TO AVOID-Angel's falling body, he draws
his forty-five automatic and fires twice into Mapache.
480 THE BULLETS DOUBLE HIM AND HURL HIM INTO.HIS MEN. As he
481 DUTCH.FIRES INTO THE TOP OF HIS. HEAD, then the room explodes
with gunfire.
,482 ZAMORRA AND TWO OF THE OTHERS scramble for cover while
drawing.
483 ONE OF DUTCH'S GRENADES explodes amongst them.
484 PIKE, FIRING WITH AMAZING rapidity empties his ,45, shoves
it in his belt, cocks the lever on the rifle, moving slowly
but steadily into the shadowed corners of the room -- kill-
ing men, firing, being shot at and hit in return.
485 DUTCH EMPTYING his .44, throwing another grenade, is hit,
his back.
486 THE SOLDIES HUNT COVER and die -- more pour in from the
487 TECTOR AND LYLE YELLING with the lust of battle charge toward
488 MOHR.REACHES THE MACHINE GUN, begins firing. Kills a number
489 PIKE KILLS HIM with his last two rifle shots and the German
490 THE GUN SWINGS, cutting a swath of death across the room,
491 PIKE: THROWS THE RIFLE. as he slips a. now clip in the .45,
whirls as:
.492 ZAMORRA PUTS three rounds into Dutch.
493 PIKE KILLS ZAMORRA AND HERRERA, then a soldier has driven a
495' MEXICANS CONTINUE FIRING AT THE AMERICANS from all sides and
the Gorch brothers, badly wounded,. but still on their feet
still are blasting away at them from the middle of the room,
then Tector, laughing, picks up. the screaming, terrified
Chita and, rushes the crowd, using the woman for a shield.
She tosses her head and dies as bullets slam into her soft
body, then he is.hit again and goes down on one knee.
496 A SOLDIER, UNSEEN BY.TECTOR', steps into a doorway. He aims
at Tecto'r with a revolver and fires Into him from several
feet away. The bullets tear into Tector and he drops the
woman and dances out into the room. As he is hit. from all
sides, he whirls around, seeing:
12th.
497 THE MAN IN THE DOORWAY, he fires his last shot into the man's
body. The man plunges forward screaming. Tector stands up
straight as bullets pour into him. Finally, he crumples fast
and falls,
:; 498 LYLE., HIT SEVERAL TIMES, SCREAMING WITH RAGE, standing over
Tector is wild-eyed, firing madly into the crowd. A bullet
splashes into his cheek and he runs..at. the nearest of his
attackers, firing, scattering them, killing most,
499 TECTOR RISES, CLICKS HIS EMPTY pistol at. the mob. A soldier
rushes him from behind with a machete and the cross fire of
his own men kills him as he swings the weapon into TectorPs
back. Tector falls to the floor,. writhing in pain, cursing,
pulling down a soldier, strangling him as he dies,
500 LYLE STAGGERS, BULLETS PUMPING into him, then falls - dead
501 DUTCH LIFTS A SOLDIER AND TOSSES him against the wall, then
falls as bullets cut into him. He rolls, then.crawls under
the tables dragging the useless lower half'of his body. Al-
thotgh in pain, he is grinning strangely. He removes a car-
bine from a dead soldier and. props himself on a bench. Taking
careful aim,, he fires and a 'soldier drops screaming-.and.
kicking. Methodically he aims and fires again, and again and
again, a man dying each time he pulls the trigger..
502. PIKE WATCHES AS HE TENSES, FINALLY JERKS THE BAYONET out of
his body, runs firing at five of the soldiers. who are rushing
the room -- kills two,. reaches the machine gun, pulls Mohr
away from the gun, ,jerks back the bolt. and staggers as a
soldier empties his pistol into him from behind, Pike him-
self turns and dies,
503 DUTCH SWINGS THE RIFLE, firing, crippling the soldier, then:
504 ANOTHER SOLDIER, HIS UNIFORM STAINED WITH BLOOD, draws his
knife and hardly able to move, falls on Dutch -- the weight
of the.fall-burying the weapon deep into Dutch's back.
Crumpled together, both.men die,
505 FOR A FEW SECONDS THERE IS STILL sporadic gunfire as the re-
maining soldiers fire into the bodies of the wild bunch..
Then it stops. A mortally. wounded man suddenly screams in
agony and writhes on the floor and dies. Another, pistol in
hand, rises, staggers to the gateway, teeters for a moment,
then falls, firing blindly into the. dust. Somewhere outside
the wall, a cur yelps and runs away into the night,
505A THE BOUNTY HUNTERS led by Thornton, ride through. It appears
deserted, _
506 IN THE COURTYARD A SMALL GROUP OF WOMEN wrapped in. black
robosas are burning candles and moving. among the dead bodies.
that spill out of the large room of the hacienda and into the
yard. It is a scene of carnage, blood now black in.the sun,
a million flies and the walls lined with waiting vultures.
There is no sign of soldiers anywhere.. A few of the bodies
have been dragged into the courtyard. Most, including Pike,
Dutch and the others, including Mapache, lie where they fell.
AND DISMOUNT, their horses snorting nervously at the smell of
blood and the stench of death. At-the end of the courtyard
where five corpses are heaped in a small Di13, a lone vulture
stands. patiently near them.
As the bounty hunters approach and the-.bird labors reluctantly
into flight, the men dismount.
Thornton, looking in through the broken wall, turns away.
Coffer and T.C. enter, whistle softly..
It's them.
You'd have.one hell of a time proving
that.a week from now, in Texas.
We could try...Hell, a pelt's a pelt,
it don't matter what condition it's in.
Picked clean -- not a gun on 'em.,.
Thornton walks slowly among the bodies.
This boy here's got some gold in his
teeth... .Let me see your knife, Coffer.
(crossing to Thornton)
em. _Hey, Thornton, should we load up?
(walking away)
Suit yourself,
We going to wait here for Jess or
meet him on the way?
But Thornton doesn't answer; reaching his horse, he mounts
and. rides away.
Coffer and T.C,. and Ross look after him..
(pointing to the bird
on the walk)
If Jess is counting on buzzards to.
lead him to. old Sykes, he's got a
long wait -- we got 'em all..
They laugh and go to work.
508 THORNTON COMES THROUGH THE GATE, ties his horse, sits down,
his back against the wall. Except for a dog and two.silent
women, the village appears deserted.
Thornton rolls a cigarette, begins to smoke it.. waiting.
509 COFFER, ROSS AND T.C.-ride out leading four pack animals, each
carrying a body.
Thornton looks up, he doesn't move.
You ain't comin'?
Maybe we better wait here for Jess,
----.No we 9.11 pick him up on the way --
I -want to-get out. of this goddamned
place -- anyways these boys will start
going ripe on us by tomorrow --. we got
to' move --
(then; to Thornton)
You sure you ain't coming?
Coffer shrugs and drinking out ofa half-full tequi.lla bottle,
rides off, followed by the others who ignore Thornton as
completely as he does them,
510 THORNTON HASN'T MOVED. Then from the. distance come three
slow-paced rifle shots -- Thornton sits up -- waits, then
there is a fourth -- Thornton settles back,
511. THE SUN HAS PASSED THE MOUNTAINS AND AS the light goes
a cold wind kicks dust across the empty street of the
village.. Thornton stands, looking off at:
IGNACIO;.and a handful of Angells compadres sit watching
him. They are leading the bounty hunters' horses, the
sacks of gold are tied to Sykes' saddle.
Didn't expect to find you here,
Deke.
Why. not -- I sent 9 em.back -- that's
all I said I'd do.
They didn't et far --
You the one that shot me?
Don't know -- does.it make any
difference?
(after a moment)
I reckon not.
What are;. your plans?
Drift around down here -- try and.
stay out of jail --
Well,, come along -- we got some work
to do --
(riding away)
It ain't like it used to be,. but it's
better than nothing.
513. THORNTON TAKES A DEEP BREATH, THEN HALF GRINS, unties his
horse, then mounts and follows.

A slight breeze gently sways the green and purple crop.
The CHIRP of CICADA is the only sound.
But suddenly the CHIRPING GETS LOUDER and LOUDER --
BZZZZZ! -- until we realize it's not the cicadas, but
a --
SWOOOSH! A lethal, razor-sharp DISC BUZZES up over the
horizon, swoops TOWARD the CAMERA and OUT OF FRAME!
The CAMERA SPINS AROUND to see the disc flying away,
chasing a man, THADDEUS MORTON, wearing a strange
metallic collar -- exhausted, horrified, about to die.
He looks over his shoulder, panting -- he's been running
forever.
Morton zig-zags through a grove of trees, a desperate
attempt to avoid the horrible serrated disc. But the
ruse is futile. The disc goes straight through the
trees, slicing a path straight as the crow flies.
dilapidated, broken down, weathering away in the field.
Morton runs around the wagon -- but the DISC BUZZES
straight through the sideboards! Wood shavings spit
everywhere! There's no stopping this thing.
running for his life -- stops, turns. He turns,
incomprehensibly mumbling, pleading for his life,
cowering.
WILD WILD WEST - Rev. 4/9/99 2.
And the DISC SWOOSHES TOWARD the CAMERA -- BZZZZZZZ!
A man leans INTO FRAME. This is GENERAL McGRATH. And
he's there to collect the silver death disc.
HOOVES THUNDER by. Then bouncing, skidding wagon wheels.
Up on the empty buckboard is a pair of murderous ex-Rebs.
As the Rebs pass a pint of whisky, lash the six-horse
team on, PAN WITH the wagon to see it's headed for...
WEST is bathing with the beatiful SALOON GIRL.
She moves in and kisses him, long and hard. West hears
the CLATTER of the APPROACHING WAGONS. He stops the
kiss and peeks out the knothole.
Down below, West sees the wagon with the Rebs.
WILD WILD WEST - Rev. 4/9/99 4A.
The HORSES SPOOK as a crate is dropped onto the wagon.
caught on the WATER TOWER LEG. It CREAKS.
West hears the CREAK. He breaks the kiss.
The tower starts to topple.
It CRASHES...
West crashes down into the tarp covering the boxes. The
only people more shocked than he is are the guards and
the Rebs he just dropped in on. West picks himself up,
smiles coolly at the drenched slack-jaws.
He looks up at the freaked-out Saloon Girl, still in the
tank. She hangs on with one hand, the other hand
clutches his clothes.
She responds by Frisbee-ing his hat down. West picks it
up, with a look... uses it to cover his genitals.
WILD WILD WEST - Rev. 4/9/99 4B.
But he never gets that word out. Bang! West lashes a
lightning martial arts kick to the Reb's jaw.
As the other Reb comes at him, he spins, still holding
the hat in front of him... and whap! Down that one goes.
West looks up at the none-too-bright water tank woman.
As she throws the rest of his clothes down in a heap...
General McGrath checks a pocket watch, looks up
impatiently at the Indian, Hudson. His eyes drift
upwards... to the balcony where...
have come up back stairs lugging a heavy steamer trunk.
McGrath subtly gestures with his eyes to the balcony for
Hudson to confirm. Hudson nods.
Hudson quickly cuts him off before he can say the name.
The Indian speaks in a very precise King's English.
MOVE IN ON an elegant brougham driven by a very large,
very striking woman in livery.
As the carriage passes under the gas lamp, we can make
out the top-hatted silhouette of McGrath's "employer,"
DR. ARLISS LOVELESS. Clustered around him inside the cab
are three more beautiful women. As he strokes the cheek
of the ORIENTAL one with the back of his hand like a
cat...
McGrath looks to the singer (Rita), who beats a hasty
retreat from him after her song. So, once again, McGrath
lays his rheumy eyes on...
She's oblivious, more intrigued by the ex-Rebs on the
balcony with the trunk. As she starts for the stairs...
a man's hand grabs her. It's the Eye-Crossed Reb again.
She tries to pull away. But the Reb won't let go.
Suddenly the coquettishness in the eyes becomes rage.
The falsetto becomes a baritone growl.
Just as the Reb registers the odd new voice... wham! Her
corsage springs out and whacks him right in the jaw. The
Reb's eyes roll back... and he slumps to the ground.
Whooa, hoss... the Soiled Dove is a man! He's ARTEMUS
GORDON and his true profession will be revealed to us
shortly. But now, as he/she stashes the unconscious Reb
behind the bar, straightens bosom and wig...
West is trying to get dressed.
As he pulls on one leg of his pants, a guard lunges at
him with a knife. West hops up on one leg, smacks the
guy with a mule kick.
Now he puts his arm through his shirt sleeve. When the
hand emerges out of the cuff, it's balled in a fist --
which coldcocks the other guard.
As if in response, the water tower, still hovering above,
now crashes to the floor -- obliterating his opponents.
He calmly looks up in time to catch the falling, naked,
screaming Saloon Girl in his arms.
West gallantly puts her down, jumps up, grabs the
overhead block and tackle system and slides through the
warehouse. As the HORSE TEAM, which has spooked,
THUNDERS past...
sails onto the runaway wagon. As he pulls himself into
the back, he gives the shivering Saloon Girl a tip of his
hat -- now on his head.
General McGrath leers down a line-up of Fat-Can's girls.
Just as he gets to the beautiful singer, who looks sick
at the thought, suddenly Gordon intrudes. He/she blocks
out the singer, poses coquettishly -- sucking a
lollypop.
Gordon/Dora starts to go as the Eye-Crossed Reb wakes up.
He grabs him/her, very pissed.
Blam! McGrath emphasizes his claim by gut-shooting the
Reb. The shot makes Dora/Gordon jump and the room go
quiet. As the Reb crumples, McGrath turns back to
Gordon/Dora, oddly inspired.
McGrath hauls him/her over to the piano player.
He punctuates with a slap to Gordon/Dora's rump. The
other singer (Rita) watches too.
Gordon/Dora is sweating. Reluctantly, he/she whispers
something to the piano player. He clears his throat and
begins singing.
West spots the contents of an open box. Eyes widen.
stuck in sand. But clinking together ominously as the
wagon races over the cobblestones.
West tries to steady the glass vials with his hands...
but it's no use. He quickly climbs over the boxes, onto
the buckboard seat. But the reins are dragging on the
ground beneath the frothing horses.
West leaps onto the horses as the wagon careens down the
street. He pulls himself over the first one's neck...
onto the next horse. And as he tries for the lead horse,
he falls between them!
Gordon/Dora singing. He/she struggles through the song
in a very tough room.
Just when it looks like the stone-faced rowdies might rip
him/her apart, McGrath starts tapping a mud-caked toe.
Encouraged, Gordon/Dora belts out the next verses OVER...
West's custom boots drag in the dirt as he's about to be
trampled under the hooves of the freaked-out horses. And
if he hasn't got enough problems, the lynch pin attaching
the team to the wagon has almost worked its way out.
CLANKING together like chimes...
Straining with every ounce of strength in his body, he
pulls himself up by the harness onto...
West grabs for the halter.
But it doesn't whoa. The wagon goes around a corner up
on two wheels! It's about to tilt over when West grabs
both the horses' ears, yanks them back -- screaming into
them.
This approach seems to work.
The team comes to an abrupt stop... and with it the wagon
hanging over the edge of a steep drop.
Jim carefully climbs off. He slaps the dust on his
jacket, straightens the crease in his trousers. When he
looks up, a bitter smile.
The tasteful sign under the red light reads: "FAT-CAN
CANDY'S." And framed in the window, General McGrath with
his singing soiled dove.
McGrath is clapping with the crowd of misfits who are now
singing along with Gordon/Dora. He/she's won over the room.
He/she curtsies to rousing applause. McGrath beams like
a man with the fire in his loins roaring. He grabs his
little songbird and up the stairs they go.
Out the WINDOWS, we see West tracking them. Simul-
taneously going up outside steps.
leads the sweating, leering General down the hall.
He/she quickly opens and closes boudoir doors --
ostensibly to find a free room for their assignation.
The real agenda is to find the mysterious trunk.
Quick peek. He/she registers a mild reaction of shock.
Closes that door and moves on to...
Quick peek. The two rebs sitting on the trunk. At their
feet is a wriggling burlap sack. The "merchandise" is alive.
Gordon/Dora giggles like a schoolgirl.
McGrath slams the door, drags Gordon/Dora roughly...
Our soiled dove has her back to the door as if steeling
herself for the task at hand. McGrath beckons her over
to the bed.
Gordon/Dora squints at the jerry-rigged ear.
Say no more. McGrath is on her like a flash, fidgeting
with it. But it pops open, revealing a spiraling screen
courtesy of Dr. Mesmer. His eyes lock onto it.
McGrath sits on the floor. Gordon smiles... this is
gonna be easy.
But McGrath doesn't answer. Gordon's Mesmer spiral slows
to a stop. McGrath is coming out of the trance. McGrath
starts to growl, rip at his/her petticoats.
As Gordon notices that his contraption's failed...
is busy trying to get the spiral going again, doesn't see
McGrath reach for his boot knife. Just as the deranged
general's about to plunge it into Gordon/Dora...
... the WINDOW EXPLODES. Jim West comes tumbling into
the room, kicks the knife out of McGrath's hand in one
smooth move. West rolls to his feet, fixes a gallant
smile on Gordon/Dora.
It takes Gordon a moment to recover. He stares at this
black Samaritan, obviously having no clue who he is.
West quickly pats McGrath down, removes a revolver and
his bag of gold coins.
As West sticks the barrel of his gun in McGrath's
gramophone ear, Gordon's eyes pop.
Gordon jerks West's gun hand away from McGrath's head
just as the dog-soldier comes around. McGrath suddenly
lunges at him.
He drives his full weight into Jim's back, pushing him out
into...
McGrath's rebel yell brings help from all directions.
DOORS BANG open all along the hallway. Not just
McGrath's men, but Hudson and his crew. A melee will
ensue.
West pushes the monster off of him, rolls as a BULLET
SPLINTERS the WOOD where he just was. The SHOT STARTS...
all screaming hysterically and heading for the exits.
The beautiful young singer, who'd been coming up the
stairs alone, is now swept back down them.
Gordon, still in character, pushes his way upstream to the
room where the scientist is held.
Hudson, his back turned, barking orders at his henchmen.
The henchmen heft the wriggling sack, when:
Hudson whirls to see the gruff-talking Gordon/Dora holding
the perfume bottle on him like it's a Colt 45. Now Gordon
shakes one of the heavy bracelets off his wrist, CLICKS a
LOCK, snapping it open. He's accessorized with custom
handcuffs.
Hudson gives a sick little smile, reaches for his gun
when... WSSSSHT!
Gordon sprays him in the eyes with the second bulb of the
atomizer. (The first Mace!) Hudson howls in pain, drops
the gun, rubs his eyes madly with both hands.
Gordon starts to snap the cuffs on the perfectly
presented wrists when...
brawling a dozen attackers. West spots McGrath trying to
escape down the stairs. He uncorks a lethal kick, sending
a thug flying through the doorway and into the back of
Gordon.
Gordon staggers, drops the perfume/mace BOTTLE which
SHATTERS. Hudson recovers his vision enough to send a
fist into Gordon's mascaraed face, pile-driving him back
into the hall. While Hudson and his men make their
escape down the back stairs with the scientist sack...
West is blocked from chasing McGrath, Gordon from going
after Hudson. West tries to push her aside.
Gordon whip off his wig, reaches inside it for something.
West blinks at the weirdness, reflexively draws his Colt.
As Gordon withdraws not a gun, but a badge, from his
wig...
is waiting at the top of the hill beside the nitro wagon.
Dr. Loveless is beside it, face still shadowed.
has opera glasses trained on the second story of Fat-
Can's. Her name is LIPPENREIDER. And now we'll see why.
The lip-reading is interrupted by the arrival of...
who come racing up with the scientist-in-the-sack.
His cane telescopes out and Loveless pokes the lynch pin
out of the harness on the nitro wagon. Then he gives the
wagon the slightest push.
Once started, the wagon rolls downhill, toward the back
door of Fat-Can Candy's, picking up speed...
Then, as his female coterie pulls the burlap sack into
the carriage, Loveless steps in behind. And they're off.
West and Gordon, oblivious to the impending disaster...
The answer is provided as the NITRO WAGON hits
downstairs.
KABOOOOOOM!!! THEME MUSIC UP... as we roll...
The titles are the familiar animated freeze frames from
the TV show. In the two corners are our heroes -- Upper
left shows West with his gun levelled toward... upper
right -- Gordon with his wig in one hand and his badge in
the other, pointed across toward West.
The cowboy/agent in the middle square fights and defeats
the various bad guys. Then as he exits, QUICK ZOOM ON
main title: "THE WILD WILD WEST."
PAN DOWN TO a sketch of a train caboose as TITLES END...
West rides his magnificent black stallion down
Pennsylvania Avenue.
Besides horse-drawn carriages, West shares the dusty road
with people on bicycles -- the latest craze. He finally
pulls his steed up at his destination...
West dismounts, ties his horse to a hitching post and
winces as he puts his weight on a sore leg.
West limps past black floor scrubbers. They stop working
to marvel at this handsome black man dressed in custom
cowboy duds walking in there like he owns the place.
But not everybody's so impressed. As West heads toward
the Oval Office, four self-important house detectives
block his way.
He nods at the six gun on West's hip. West coolly flexes
his hand above it, like he's about to draw...
Then like lightning, with his other hand, he whips out a
sawed-off shotgun hidden by his jacket. He pokes the
12-gauge barrels up against Pinkerton's surprised crotch.
A voice stops the situation from escalating further.
The detective's head swivels around to see...
stands in the doorway.
The detectives back away from the hair-trigger cowboy as
fast as they can. West reholsters the gun and
continues...
President Grant goes over to his desk, lights a cigar.
Backlit in the haze, the portly bearded figure lives up
to the myth.
West limps across the room to the bar, pours himself a
glass of whiskey, takes a cigar out of the humidor.
Now West's blood is up.
West just looks at him soberly. Draws his gun and
places it against the President's head. Grant's eyes
widen.
West points the GUN to the ceiling and pulls the trigger.
BLAM!!! As Grant jumps a foot and plaster rains down...
West lowers his gun, nods at Gordon's class ring.
(the real one) stands in the doorway, hands on hips,
surrounded by his house detectives -- their guns drawn.
West nudges the fake Grant in the fake belly with his gun
barrel -- go ahead. Sheepishly, Gordon starts peeling
off his primitive, but effective, facial prosthetics.
Just as Gordon makes his intestinal allusion, West takes
a ceremonial bayonet off Grant's desk and pokes a hole in
the inflated bladder that was his fake paunch. The AIR
HISSES out, finishes deflating with a flatulent R-R-RIP.
(Hey, the first whoopee cushion?)
Gordon scowls at him.
West smirks as Grant looks up at the bullet hole in the
ceiling, then fixes West with a disapproving eye.
THE WILD WILD WEST - Rev. 6/15/98 21.
Grant turns and EXITS FRAME.
The place is a buzzing intelligence operations center --
state-of-the-art for the 1860's. Maps of the U.S. and
the world are on the wall. Various staff and military
people work CLACKING TELEGRAPHS, PRINTING MACHINES that
GRIND out reports, etc.
Grant stops at a display of daguerreotype photos, all
depicting distinguished bewhiskered men.
The detectives snicker over that one. Grant's had
enough.
Grant holds out a letter to Gordon and West. Gordon
snatches it, reads:
THE WILD WILD WEST - Rev. 6/15/98 21A.
An aide presents a glass case. Inside is a cake in the
shape of the White House.
Suddenly dozens of deadly-looking spiders swarm out from
inside the cake. Gordon jerks his hand back.
Grant's had enough.
Grant points to a map of the United States. The railroad
lines have been drawn in... still a gap between them.
They both return Grant's salute as the President stomps
off. His AIDE now approaches.
Gordon takes the box, hurries to catch up with West.
West and Gordon, walking toward the hitching post. West
is so beside himself he can barely untie his high-voltage
stud. He glowers at Gordon who goes over to where...
Is parked on the other side of a bush. It has the
customary big wheel in the front, little wheel in the
back. (Hidden from sight is a motor on the front tire.
Dual manifolds that sling under the rider's legs.)
West shakes his head in disgust.
West swings into the saddle. He looks at the SNORTING
wild HORSE under him, then down at Gordon attaching the
box onto the seat of his Nitro-whatever.
West spurs his horse and leaves Gordon in the proverbial
cloud of dust.
Although West's intentions are clear, for some reason,
Gordon's in no particular hurry. He sighs, climbs on the
bike, takes out a hankie and cleans a pair of goggles.
Then, finally ready...
VROOOM! An ENGINE KICKS IN and Gordon rockets forward.
(Yep, Artemus has invented the first motorcycle!) Fiery
exhaust blasts out of the manifolds as the bike propels
him down the street at about 60 mph right past...
who both look over in wide-eyed shock. The horse rears
as Gordon SCREAMS by -- leaving them in a cloud of
internal combustion.
From in front, as it CHUGS TOWARDS us. Sitting up in the
spanking new steam engine (No. 5) is a white-haired
Coleman. The Wanderer is his pride and joy. Coleman
pushes the throttle forward and the ENGINE ROARS PAST
us... followed by a tender, and two gleaming passenger
cars.
Then comes West THUNDERING past in a desperate effort to
catch up.
riding like hell. Getting the last ounce of speed out of
his well-lathered steed, he finally pulls alongside the
rear passenger car. He looks up... In the window, we see
Gordon engrossed in what he's doing... which appears to
be sewing.
If Gordon hears him, he pretends not to. He just
casually makes the next stitch.
West's horse has had it. They're losing ground to the
train. At the last second, West leans over at full
gallop and grabs a handle on the side of the train. He
swings out of the saddle, hanging on for dear life,
blowing in the breeze like laundry.
Finally, his boot finds a small metal plate to put its
weight on. Just as West stands safely on it... whoosh!
He flies up in the air and drops through a sliding
partition in the roof.
The car is like a classy Victorian men's club. Bar
stocked with crystal decanters, a pool table, decorative
pistols on the wall, books, etc. Gordon, seated in a
club chair, looks over as West falls from the ceiling
into a seat. He's hot, dusty and very pissed off. He
glowers at Gordon murderously.
He takes off jacket, starts rolling up his sleeves.
Gordon remains remarkably cool, continues sewing.
He shows him some real needlepoint.
West draws his gun, aims it at Gordon's stomach and cocks
the trigger.
Gordon quickly pulls the vest away from his stomach.
West takes off his guns and puts them on the table.
Gordon puts down The Impermeable, stands with a weary
sigh.
Whap! West unleashes a lightning punch that drives
Gordon across the train car. He dabs at his bloody lip.
Then to West's utter amazement, Gordon puts his hands
together as if praying while at the same time, crooking
his right leg stork-like. Is this some kind of martial
art? Then, he bends at the waist, and like a ballet
dancer, extends his leg out to the wall and flips a
switch.
It immediately triggers a leather hammer to swing down
from the ceiling. It whacks West on the side of the
head, and sends him spinning back onto the pool table.
shakes it off and is about to attack again. Gordon
calmly pokes a hidden button. Suddenly the pool table
revolves. West is gone.
West, eyes wide, is clinging on for dear life, staring at
the ties racing by, inches from his face.
Gordon pours a fine Bordeaux, speaks loudly toward floor.
As he swishes the wine in his mouth...
West reaches up to get a handhold in the myriad of tubes
and wires on the underside of the car. As he rips one
tube out of the undercarriage...
Gordon has just settled into the club chair, puts his wine
down on the table.
Suddenly SHACKLES SNAP out of the arms of the chair,
pinning Gordon's wrists. Before he knows what hit him,
the floor opens and the club chair disappears.
Gordon appears upside down in the chair, chagrined at
his predicament. West looks from the escape trolley
Gordon was talking about back to his partner.
Suddenly they flip OUT OF FRAME and back into the car,
shocked to find themselves facing...
Coleman's a scowling, grizzled old man in a coal-stained
suit. He's got a fire in his eye, brown spittle in the
corner of his mouth where a cigarette butt lives
permanently, and a large copper pot in his hand.
He threatens them with the pot of steaming liquid. Now,
for the first time, Gordon really looks troubled.
A severed human head is in a vise.
West looks from the head to the open box.
Gordon holds up a strange, circular metallic object.
But West is still staring in disbelief at the head.
Gordon starts fiddling with a lantern positioned behind
the head.
Excited, Gordon turns on the lantern attached to the back
of his head. Beams of light are coming through his
eyeballs, creating a blurry color image on the wall.
West turns his head sideways to try to view the inverted
image projected on the wall. Gordon realizes the
problem.
He turns Morton's head in the vise. It's right side up,
but still blurry.
appears. It's a man who has a tiny Victrola horn for an
ear. He's holding a bloody metal boomerang.
Gordon sees something in McGrath's pocket.
Gordon drums his fingers on his great frontal lobe,
stymied.
WILD WILD WEST - Rev. 4/9/99 31.
West takes the bifocals out of the box, casually puts them
on Morton's nose. West now gestures to the wall.
The white blur in the man's pocket is now focused. We
can see that it's the top of a piece of paper. He reads
the writing on it.
We see the Wanderer parked on the siding as we hear voices
over.
Gordon has his wardrobe open. Selected from his vast
array of costumes and disguises is a full livery outfit.
West is right in Gordon's face.
WILD WILD WEST - Rev. 4/9/99 32.
West straps on his holster.
Gordon displays a belt with a silver buckle. He taps the
buckle... a Derringer pops out. West stares, impressed.
Gordon takes out a sequined dress, holds the Derringer up
against it.
West starts to walk away. Gordon grabs him.
WILD WILD WEST - Rev. 4/9/99 33.
Gordon grabs his fake breasts off the rack. He puts
them on.
West touches Gordon's fake breasts.
WILD WILD WEST - Rev. 4/9/99 33A.
walking through the next car, carrying a tray of tea.
Gordon's last line got his attention. What the...?
Coleman peeks around the corner to see West eyeing
Gordon's "chest."
Coleman shakes his head and walks off.
West is thwapping Gordon's breasts.
West takes one of the cow udders out of Gordon's bodice
and dumps the buckwheat onto the ground.
West goes over to a wash basin, picks up a water pitcher
and fills the cow bladder. West squeezes the cow bladder
shut and holds it up to his chest.
Passing back through the next car. When he hears that
last line, he can't believe it. He peeks in again to
see...
WILD WILD WEST - Rev. 4/9/99 33B.
Coleman's mouth drops. He's sweating.
Coleman walks off, shaking his head.
Suddenly, Gordon shoots the cuffs off his jacket. Out of
one sleeve comes a pen. Out the other, a small pad of
paper. They are both connected to a spring-loaded metal
gizmo up his sleeve. West reacts, drawing his pistol up
into Gordon's face.
carrying some costumed swells pass through wrought-iron
gates guarded by some of McGrath's ex-Rebs. FOLLOW it up
a Spanish moss-draped drive to a huge Garden District
mansion. As the carriage pulls to a stop in front...
WILD WILD WEST - Rev. 4/9/99 33C.
Jim West drops to the ground from where he'd hitched a
ride underneath. He rolls into the shadows of the house.
When he stands, he's face to face with a huge GUARD with
a gun.
He smirks at a lawn jockey. West reaches into his coat.
He withdraws his hand. While the Guard squints at his
empty palm, West grabs his head with his other hand and
smacks it into the lawn jockey's fist... clang! West
leans the cold-cocked Guard against the house, uses his
shoulder as a step, boosting him up to...
West grabs the ironwork underneath and acrobatically
swings himself over the rail. As he BREAKS the PANE on
the French door with his gun butt...
West lets himself in. Then just as he's about to part
the heavy drapes... he hears women's voices approaching.
Now Miss Lippenreider, Amazonia and Munitia (bewigged and
wearing costumes) wrangle a beautiful and defiant Latina
into the room. When she turns we recognize she's the
singer from Fat-Can's. Rita is in her early 20s, wearing
a 19th-Century camisole so scanty, it makes it hard to
concentrate on what she's saying.
Amazonia grabs her by the throat, choking the word off.
A ramp leads to a large bed. A leather and steel
prosthesis is hanging from pulleys attached to the
ceiling.
Amazonia just picks her up and drags the hapless Rita
into the room. West emerges from behind the curtains,
shakes his head. Weird. He eases out the door and
into...
West hears the PARTY DIN coming from down below. He
goes to the balcony.
The scene below is hallucinogenically surreal. A Babel
of foreign languages is the first thing that strikes us.
Avant garde MUSIC is coming from two 10x10 quartet boxes
on either side of the room to create stereo.
West turns to see who busted him. Coming his way is a
ravishing Chinese girl dressed up as a DRAGON LADY.
The name means something to West.
We FOLLOW them as she takes his arm and leads him down
the stairs, into the party.
West surveys the crowd.
West scans the room. Stops.
She's got the mole, too. Gordon has apparently encored
his Soiled Dove get-up.
Miss East sees who he's looking at. She makes a pouty
face as there's a flourish from the STEREO QUARTET.
West watches as she joins...
Miss East leads them in a sober rendition of "The Battle
Hymn of the Republic" in front of a large doorway.
From behind the doors we hear the WHIR of an ELEVATOR.
It stops with a CLUNK. Suddenly...
bursts open and Abraham Lincoln in a mini-float appears.
It's decked out like Lincoln's box at Ford's theater. On
its own power, it moves past the laughing party-goers in
the foyer. Now the women throw grapes on the floor.
are what's trampling down the vintage. West takes in the
whole man. Very curious. Then suddenly... KABOOM!
It explodes like a pinata. Up from the hole in his neck
peeps... DR. ARLISS LOVELESS.
The Southern crowd gasps at Loveless's dramatic appearance.
As he giggles, the distaff corps surround him and remove
the Lincoln paraphernalia. Then step aside, revealing...
is half a man. Literally. Cut off at the waist and
mounted on a wheelchair platform that is powered by an
engine, he is a man bereft of tuchus, kishkes and
everything else in that vicinity that makes life
interesting.
Dr. Loveless looks down at himself, smoothes half of his
Fritz Lang Metropolis-style suit. His face turns dark as
he surveys the crowd.
You can hear a pin drop. Loveless turns to the foreign
dignitaries.
He suddenly seems distracted by the comely beauties that
surround him. Then abruptly, manically...
Loveless signals to the quartets to resume playing. Miss
East leans down and whispers in his ear. Loveless looks
in West's direction.
Now Loveless wheels over to West. West isn't hiding.
He's cocky in the face of rolling danger.
West keeps a lid on his temper. Two can play at this
game.
Loveless smiles slightly.
Danger flickers in Loveless's eyes. He looks to Miss
East.
Loveless's face drops. He is no longer amused. Miss
East winks at West, then accompanies Loveless in the
direction of the study where...
General McGrath waits impatiently. He takes two
champagnes off a passing tray, guzzles them, then
wipes his mouth on Dolly Madison's bustle. As his
eyes sweep the room...
He ducks behind a mountain man carrying the French
tricolor. When Loveless and General McGrath disappear
into the study and close the door, West eases after
them. He pauses as he passes the "Soiled Dove," leans
into her big bouffant. He regards a stained-glass window
patterned with a spider over her shoulder.
As the Soiled Dove jumps a little, West continues over to
the study door. Now the Soiled Dove turns, and we see
the scared/confused expression. Maybe it's because she
is not Artemus.
He's the mountain man in the fringe jacket. And right
now he's shaking his head as he watches West resort to a
decidedly low-tech surveillance method of Loveless's
study.
McGrath paces in front of Loveless's desk.
McGrath's face relaxes into a pyorrheic grin.
Loveless takes pencil in hand and draws a map on the
desk.
Loveless wheels his chair toward the door with McGrath
behind him folding up the map...
ducks out of the way as Loveless and McGrath emerge from
the study. As they disappear into the throng of well-
wishers, West takes a thin lock-pick out of his hat band.
It takes him a moment or two, but the LOCK finally
CLICKS. Then West slips inside, apparently undetected --
except by an unimpressed Gordon.
moves quickly to the desk past walls filled with oil
portraits of various Loveless relatives. The one behind
the desk is in the style of Gainsborough. A Loveless
uncle is standing on a windswept grouse moor, two English
setters by his side, a Holland and Holland double held in
the crook of his arm.
West turns his attention to the desk blotter. There's a
faint imprint where Loveless drew the map. West takes
his penknife and a pencil -- grates some graphite into
the depressions. He's just about to do a rubbing on a
piece of paper when... someone swipes it out of his hand.
Hands on hips, she gives him a "naughty, naughty" look.
But instead of scolding him further, Miss East plants an
over-heated kiss on him. Tongues are involved. As they
break, she gives a little nod of approval.
She pushes him down into Dr. Loveless's chair.
She starts to undo the buttons of his trousers. But
West has a job to do. Well, maybe he can do two jobs at
once...
is being the perfect party guest, moving through the
crowd chit-chatting with this person and that (in
French, Spanish, German) when he sees something of
interest.
Munitia and Lippenreider come out of an upstairs bedroom,
lock it behind them. Hmmm. What's in there? As he
starts upstairs, Amazonia appears, blocking his way.
Amazonia stares at him, then spiels off a couple lines
in a foreign language that makes Gordon's eyes widen.
He understands what she said and it's not flattering.
Gordon moves off in a shock.
are locked in a passionate embrace. West manages to
position her nearly-naked rear end over the graphite
powder. Very carefully, he stands, pushing her buttocks
onto the desk and then rolling her off. The imprint on
her left cheek is perfect. But unfortunately, it's
backwards!
Damn. He lets Miss East concentrate on what she's doing,
which from the SOUNDS O.S., doesn't appear to be a
demonstration of the correct way to butter corn.
West spies a mirror on the other side of the room and
raises her ass up into position so he can see the
corrected reflection.
COMES INTO VIEW. It clearly shows the meeting place to
be Malheureux Point, northeast of New Orleans. But the
mirror reflects something else of interest...
The painting behind him has come to life. The Loveless
in the painting swings a real shotgun around and is
pointing it at the back of West's head.
suddenly contorts his upper torso just as an EXPLOSION
rips the back of the chair where his head would have
been.
He draws and SHOOTS the would-be assassin, who falls out
of the painting, dead. West turns to see...
A surprised look on her face. A hole in her forehead.
He lowers her head gently to the ground, regards her
map-imprinted rear end.
emerges just as a Kentucky reel starts up. He weaves his
way through the dance floor and spots the Soiled Dove
look-alike out on the floor. West reluctantly
straightens his shoulders and cuts in. This bold move
gets some looks of disapproval from the pecan pie crowd.
dancing. Both look straight ahead, not at each other.
West so as not to attract any more attention. His partner
because she's scared shitless of this strange Negro who
keeps hounding her.
West looks over to where Loveless is leading a contingent
of foreigners out a side exit.
The Soiled Dove look-alike is speechless. Before he
goes, West leans in, smirks.
And just to dig the grave deeper, West lays hands on them
and gives them a little squeeze. This immediately
elicits a scream and a slap in the face that shocks the
bejesus out of the black cowboy. And he's not the only
one.
staring at him. We know what they're thinking, but the
Mountain Man behind West says it for everyone.
And with that, Gordon opens his deerskin jacket to reveal
his own rope, which he throws to the mob. West looks
back at the character in amazement. That's Gordon?!
Before West can say or do anything, guns are at his
temple, and he's swept out of the room.
WILD WILD WEST - Rev. 4/9/99 45.
Gordon calmly straightens his coonskin cap, seemingly
uninterested in West's imminent hanging. In the hubbub
of everyone rushing out for the hanging, Gordon heads up
the unguarded stairs to the locked room.
As he pulls out his high tech auto-wind lock-pick and
quickly gains entrance to the door...
Hand-held torches illuminate. The rope is tossed over a
lamp post. PAN DOWN TO where one of the mob, dressed as
GEORGE WASHINGTON, is binding West's hands behind his
back.
eases in, stops at what he sees. And it sure ain't
scientists. Beside the bed, locked in an iron disco-like
cage, is Rita, still wearing her scanty outfit. Gordon
squints at her, gives a charming smile.
She takes a breath as if she's going to start screaming.
Gordon quickly holds up a hand.
THE WILD WILD WEST - Rev. 6/15/98 46.
To Rita's amazement, Gordon opens his jacket and
unbuttons his vest to reveal... a complete miniature tool
shop. Quickly he pulls out a thin cable and attaches it
to a tiny wheel on the spur of one of his boots.
Gordon unsnaps the sole of his shoe. It becomes a pedal
that operates the wheels' rotation. Now he removes a bit
and handle from his vest and attaches the cable. Starts
to pump his foot. It's a foot-powered drill.
WILD WILD WEST - Rev. 4/9/99 47.
But Rita isn't listening to the food review. Her mind's
racing. Finally, the LOCK CLICKS and the cage door
swings open. Gordon takes the distressed damsel in his
arms, lifts her out.
West is lifted onto the back of a wagon. With the noose
dangling in front of his nose, West addresses the crowd.
WILD WILD WEST - Rev. 4/9/99 47A.
Soiled Dove gasps.
The CAMERA FINDS the Soiled Dove. She faints.
As West searches desperately for signs of rescue by his
"partner," suddenly the wagon lurches forward...
As they plummet toward the ground.
The rope catches... and stretches!
As they slowly touch the ground.
Nobody is more confused than West.
How the fuck did that happen? But before anybody can
figure out Gordon's trick rope, speak of the devil...
The crowd turns with alarm to see...
Nostrils flared and wild-eyed, are having their rumps
snapped by Gordon's reins. Rita holds on for dear life
as the mad Mountain Man drives the carriage at full speed
right into the crowd -- scattering them.
He sees his opportunity for rescue, puts a foot into the
back of George Washington, grabs his gun, and somersaults
into the air...
lands squarely in the back. And just as the rope starts
to stretch around his neck again, Gordon whirls around
with a Bowie knife and cuts it.
West leans into Gordon's ear.
THE WILD WILD WEST - Rev. 6/15/98 49.
Suddenly, there's a VOLLEY of SHOTS from some cracker
sharpshooters. West responds with an amazing display of
RAPID-FIRE marksmanship, picking off half a dozen of
Loveless's shooters, even while the carriage bumps wildly
on its getaway. BLAMBLAMBLAMBLAM!!!
Now West notices the half-dressed bombshell in the
carriage.
Gordon's eyes pop.
THE WILD WILD WEST - Rev. 6/15/98 50.
Gordon starts singing the song... West rolls his eyes,
cuts off the chit-chat.
And with that... West suddenly leaps over Rita -- lands
on the back of one of the horses. He grabs a handful of
mane, leans over and unclips the harness. And with a
kick in the ribs, West is off at a gallop -- leaving
Gordon, one remaining horse and an awed Rita behind to
chew his dust.
Dr. Loveless and his visiting foreign dignitaries are
sipping champagne. One of them is holding a little DOG
in his arms, BARKING at something in the dark. General
McGrath stands at the railing, uncharacteristically
pensive. Loveless rolls over, hands him a glass of
champagne.
McGrath visibly winces at the sound of it.
Loveless looks at him, puzzled, then gets it.
Loveless speaks for the benefit of the others.
A reb battalion waits in a foggy meadow that slopes down
to marsh. Beyond that is the Gulf of Mexico. We
recognize one of the REBS from the cathouse. He opens
his pocket watch.
Suddenly they hear a CLANKING and SCREECHING coming from
the marsh. They ready their arms and get in defensive
positions. What they can't see through the fog is...
amphibiously sludges up through the mud and reeds,
passing by the dumbstruck soldiers as it heads to the
center of the field. The contraption has a large cannon
and Gatling guns bristling from several ports. The Rebs
cheer their new weapon.
THE WILD WILD WEST - Rev. 7/1/98 52.
Now a MORTAR appears through the turret and FIRES a
ROCKET that EXPLODES over the Reb soldiers, illuminating
the field. As soldiers shield their eyes from the
blinding light...
Unbeknownst to the Rebs, Loveless has mowed and stained
the field with concentric lines to give it a giant dart
board appearance.
Suddenly the TANK TURRET OPENS FIRE on them. Once over
their initial shock, the Rebs FIRE BACK with their
Springfield RIFLES. But the BULLETS PING off the tank's
impenetrable skin like goober peas.
Lippenreider is viewing the carnage through large
binoculars on a stand.
General McGrath turns from the rail and faces Loveless,
outraged.
Loveless turns to him, cocks his head.
Loveless turns to Munitia holding a steno pad.
Amazonia pushes a sick dignitary away from the rail so
she can get a sight line to the tank with her lantern
semaphore. She begins flashing the new gear ratio.
Now in the b.g., we hear the GATLINGS OPEN UP.
Lippenreider is reading the lips of the tank's victims.
As Munitia scribbles dutifully, McGrath shoves her aside.
He pulls his pistol.
Loveless, his back to him, is seemingly unconcerned at
having a gun barrel pressed against his skull.
As Loveless's right index finger finds a black button on
the arm of his wheelchair...
The steel tubes that comprise the armrests are actually
shotgun barrels facing fore and aft. McGrath's finger
tightens on the trigger.
WILD WILD WEST - Rev. 4/9/99 54.
BOOOM!!! McGrath has a very startled expression as he
looks down at the aftereffects of DOUBLE-OUGHT BUCKSHOT.
As he crumples to the deck, Loveless sniffs.
The dignitary's DOG starts BARKING, jumps to the deck.
It sits next to the fallen General's gramophone ear and
cocks his head. With the RCA logo invented we MOVE BACK
He sighs at his pale guests. They don't seem to
appreciate the efficiency of his slaughter.
Munitia and Amazonia unceremoniously dump McGrath's BODY
overboard. SPLOOSH... Loveless addresses the
dignitaries...
A black waits ominously on the tracks. It's less a
traditional train car than a riveted, armored, turreted fortress
on wheels. Also, it currently lacks an engine.
Loveless, over his shoulder to the foreign contingent...
He looks dotingly at the TANK, which CLATTERS up from the
battlefield on its treads... then drives onto the tracks.
Wheels drop down out of the chassis, the treads retract
up, and the TANK BACKS INTO the rest of the TRAIN.
CLANK. It's a neat modular fit. Black death on rails.
The foreigners watch with awe as...
wheels up onto the tank/train. He drops the
expansiveness, fixes them with a viper's eye.
It's quiet. The dead men are all in the #9 or #10 ring.
Now a rider ENTERS FRAME...
West slowly dismounts, transfixed by the slaughter on the
pre-fab battlefield. There's something hauntingly familiar
about all this for him -- the mangled bodies, the tread marks...
But we'll find out about that later.
West draws his weapon and begins walking through the
victims. The pace of his search quickens when he isn't
finding what he's looking for -- General McGrath.
have arrived in the one-horse carriage. Gordon is trying
to recreate the crime scene. Rita trails behind him, his
coat thrown over her shoulders, trying not to gag as she
passes the mangled corpses.
Rita can't handle Gordon's clinical posturing.
As she walks quickly away, West comes over, a haunted
look on his face.
THE WILD WILD WEST - Rev. 6/15/98 57.
He looks out at the battlefield as if reliving it.
Gordon is sympathetic to his obvious pain -- just shuts
up. West's grim reverie is interrupted by MOANING coming
from the shoreline. They all follow the sound to find...
General McGrath, washed up on the shore. West looks down
at him. Now Rita, still looking green around the gills,
rejoins the party.
As grey as four-day-old mullet, McGrath manages a smile
for his relentless pursuer.
McGrath fades out. West grabs him and shakes him.
With the meaning of it all sinking in, West grabs McGrath
by the collar and pulls him toward him.
THE WILD WILD WEST - Rev. 6/15/98 58.
The General tries to speak. West puts his ear to the
General's mouth. But before he can say it, McGrath
closes his eyes for the last time.
West's shoulders sag. Then from behind...
West turns to her... well?
As West and Gordon turn to one another in alarm...
West and Gordon climb up onto the Wanderer and enter...
West and Gordon burst in, surprising Coleman, who's got
his feet up, perusing the Playboy of the day -- a mail
order catalogue.
West snatches the catalogue out of his hands, does a take
at the pictures of chunky models in bloomers.
As Coleman quickly exits, Gordon looks out the window,
onto the platform.
As the ENGINE ROARS to life...
Rita gives a forlorn little wave as the TRAIN CHUGS away.
Rita disappears from view in a cloud of steam...
West has every weapon on the train out for cleaning and
loading. Gordon is in the galley where he continues
his conversation with West while preparing dinner.
THE WILD WILD WEST - Rev. 6/15/98 60.
Suddenly there's a WHOOSH and Rita falls through the
ceiling and plops in the chair just like West did
earlier. He instinctively pulls his gun. Puts it
away as Gordon muses about her anatomy.
Rita raises an eyebrow, looks to the galley as Gordon
comes out with a platter of food. He still doesn't
see her there.
Gordon turns and looks into the car. Finally sees her.
Changes gears without missing a beat.
Gordon gestures for West to join him at the pool table.
Rita immediately goes for the food.
Gordon turns to her, exasperated with himself.
Rita hasn't even waited for anyone's approval to start
eating. West shakes his head at her chutzpa.
She uses the time to get another bite into her mouth.
West cuts off the chit-chat.
West rolls his eyes.
West picks up the speaker horn and calls Coleman.
West looks out the window. Nothing but sagebrush and
animal skulls out there. Rita comes up close to Jim,
fire in her big, brown eyes.
That gets the man of action where he lives.
She grabs West's hand.
West kinda melts a little. This girl does have her
charms. Gordon, a little jealous, puffs his chest out.
West draws his guns, twirls them and reholsters.
Artemus raps his knuckles on the wall making a METALLIC
sound. Then he smugly demonstrates that the light
fixture is actually a Gatling gun.
Finally he moves to the billiard table, while Rita nods
... and keeps eating.
Gordon unclicks it, triumphantly rolls it into a pocket.
West snorts at his obvious play for Rita's attentions.
West jumps in before Gordon can answer.
WILD WILD WEST - Rev. 4/9/99 65.
West and Gordon have bunked down on opposite couches,
both deep in thought.
West sits up.
opens and Rita emerges from the state room...
Rita leaves...
WILD WILD WEST - Rev. 4/9/99 66.
Gordon and West react as Coleman's voice booms out of
the pipe.
As they scramble for boots, weapons, Rita comes out of her
room.
Gordon ushers her to the back.
Meanwhile, West pulls on his boot. When he stands on it,
a three-inch STILETTO SNAPS out of the toe.
West looks at him incredulously.

